has come, so he will not drop his
old baggage. His recent good fortune may not be ill-gotten, but he does risk it being
ill-held. The bandits will gladly deliver him, release him from all these new burdens,
if he will not let go of the old ones himself. Sometimes the things that we’ve been
and done, and all of the people we used to be, will want to go with us through life,
with all that we ever possessed in tow. This makes for a dismally slow procession.
Yet we have traits running counter to this: even when moving to much larger homes,
most of us know the relief that we feel in choosing which of our piles to let go of.
40.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.4: militia’s fallback encampment, not a mistake)
Release your big toe*
When companions approach, trust them
40.4x Release your big toe:
Still not (in) the proper stance
The young archer’s aim might be superb, but something is wrong with his stance.
He has fumbled his otherwise excellent shot by catching his toe in the bowstring.
The positions assumed by the archers are not like those poses and postures carried
through time by rituals. Every part of a stance has a meaning and translates into aim.
These have been tested and trued for thousands of years, and while it might be true
that refinements might lurk undiscovered, most of these alternate options have now
been tried and let go of. The aim is the thing, and means should assist, not intrude.
Here at least he can trust the social norms, and the friends who now rush to his aid.
Three quivers of bull’s eyes will command more respect than doing one’s very own
thing. All of the fancy maneuvers just cannot forget to stand on inelegant ground.
296

40.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.5: no nose or feet, rouge sashed help, slow relief)
The noble young one, in bondage, still has freedoms
Promising
Holding true among the common people
40.5x The noble young one (still) owns freedoms
(Which) the common people retreat (from)
Deliverance is a triumph, and this part is easy to bear. But whether it unchains the
people, liberates the mind, opens the heart, saves the soul or frees the spirit, it will
leave you facing enormous unknowns, not the thing for faint-hearted people. Others
don’t want the unknowns. If one would be free of the others,  simply tell them that
deliverance is self-devised, that salvation is a question of diligence. The others will
flee in great haste to the safety of their entanglements. Freedom lies in the attitudes.
Sleep under a tree in the mountains and you are camping, sleep under a tree in the
park and you are homeless. The unfree are unfree wherever they go, especially on
vacation. The free are always free, even in chains or in prison. How optional is their
suffering? They simply volunteer to be where they are, then they depart from there.
40.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.6: being confident, drinking wine, don’t soak head)
The duke takes aim at the raptor atop the
high battlement’s peak
Success at this means nothing cannot be turned to advantage
40.6x The duke takes aim at the raptor
In order to be free of the obstinate
The raptor alights up on the high wall, hardened to purpose and looking for plunder,
flaunting the way that he holds those below in his spell. The duke strings his bow
and awaits the right time. The highest point of the predator’s arrogance makes one
focal point the aim of all senses. The tension it created has transferred itself to the
string. Timing and circumstance fire the shaft. There is no pardon or lenience here.
Time itself has called for this liberation. It had to take care of itself, the result was
much too compelling. Once the pieces were all in place it was only a matter of time,
and a duke to be time’s servant. Life is under the shadow no more. The raptor, once
plucked, looks a lot like a chicken: a really nasty, inedible chicken. Of course this is
not just a fowl, but the symbol at the center of focus, and the excuse to st