only gets hunted down. High-flying birds have their limits too:
that steady force which brings them back home binds heaven’s behavior as well.
The stars themselves obey this, a company noble enough to have some dignity left.
If we accept these matters of fact with good cheer, we’ll be lucky to settle for less.
425

62.M, Key Words
Laws of averages, averageness, many too many; mediocrity, anonymity, triviality
Overdevelopment, overpopulation, odds aga inst one among many; self as a detail
Humility, lowering expectations; settling for little or less; truth in scale, smallness
Realism, ordinary reality, everyday suchness, nothing special, place in big picture
Instinctual intelligence in species subject to predation, vulnerability, heedfulness,
Watchfulness, vigilance, care(fulness), conscientiousness, awareness of finitude
62.G, From the Glossary
xiao3 (to be) average, common, diminished, homogeneous, humble, insignificant,
lesser, light, little, low(ly, er, est), mean, mediocre, minor, minute, modest, slight,
ordinary, small(er, est), petty, tiny, trifling, trivial, unimportant, young(er, est),
minimal; (a, the) commonness, homogeneity, littleness, meanness, mediocrity,
pettiness, smallness; commonly, ordinarily; in detail; some small, of little, a little;
for a short (time, while); (to) diminish, minimize, shrink, belittle; does not imply
bad or wrong, but sometimes inferiority.
guo4 (to) go beyond, go past, exceed, surpass, transcend, miss, stray from, pass
(by, over); bypass, get by, transgress, trespass, stray, err, inundate, predominate,
exceed proper limits (s, ed, ing); (to be) passing, transient, errant, past, in excess,
extreme, exceptional, too much (of), excessive, beyond, above, overly, unusual,
extraordinary; greater/larger than; (a, the) error, transgression, excess(iveness),
fault (s); will err; to a fault, to extremity, to excess, to extremes
62.T, Tuan Zhuan
Smallness in excess
The small are those who go beyond and so (are) fulfilled
Exceeding, accordingly, (is) worth persistence
To take part in the time (is) to move
The flexible gains the center
This is how minor concerns (are) promising
The firm (has) lost position and also is not in the center
(And) so this is, accordingly, not suited to great concerns
There is the flying bird’s image herein
The flying bird bequeaths this message:
(If) not adapted to heights (then) adapt to (remaining) below
Much promise:
Above (is) resistance while below (is) acceptance
426

62.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.1: meeting one’s match or superior, 10 days no error)
A flying bird on the way to misfortune
62.1x A flying bird on the way to misfortune:
Seeming ill-suited to the task
The small who get by heed the timing of things. Clearly not all will succeed. Life
has learned this, and brings forth the small in great numbers, that attrition might not
take them all. Most of the young miss the fall migration, becoming statistics instead.
The spare or extra young ones are not expendable though: most of these precious
young things will be food. That even the small are now thriving is not an excuse to
be heedless. But here we have a young raptor, perched on the edge of his nest, not
fully fledged yet, but just dying to get out and ready to conquer those skies. A point
of view from the future of raptors in general suggests now is the best time to fail,
before he builds nests of his own. There are random events which could save him.
The gravity will be lighter next week. A little distraction might buy him some time.
62.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.2: regrets pass)
Passing by one’s ancestor
To meet with one’s grandmother
Wanting to reach one’s superior
But meeting another underling
Not wrong
62.2x Not reaching one’s superior:
The underling does not allow bypassing
It seems like he stands in line for half the morning, mooing and bleating with all of
the others. His one great ambition today was to spend some high quality time with
the spirit tablets l