Parkhurst
* Place the work of a wife and mother on the same footing as other work; that is,
on the footing of labor worth its hire. —G. B. Shaw
* The greatest thing a father can do for his children is to love their mother.
—Josh McDowell
* If you educate a man you educate a person, but if you educate a woman you
educate a family. —Ruby Manikan
280

GUA 38, KUI2, ESTRANGEMENT
 
  Binary 110 101 = 53; Dui below, Li above
38.X, Overall Image
The flame rises, the lake descends
Estrangement
The noble young one, accordingly, associates, and yet is unique
Fire and water move in different directions. The mystic must stretch to name them
one thing. Unity needs reflection. Things like to move and grow according to their
natures. More often than not, this will mean moving and growing apart. Existence
means to stand out. Evolution’s direction is out and away; if it had a goal it would
not be to make things the same. Even within a species, the normal growth is apart.
But if growth itself grows distances, then maturity learns to cross distances, not to
erase them. The sage likes comparing, seeing the similar and families. But he also
sees limits to this, so within his closest of fellowships he retains his singular nature.
38.0, Estrangement
In ordinary matters, promising
When things do not seem to be coming together, it is only our cosmos expanding.
We focus then on small, nearby things that are coming apart somewhat less quickly.
If we begin with the small and the ordinary, such as working on who we are, we can
keep our goals attainable. The others will go where they must and do what they will.
The distance between our points of view must increase, but this is how we come to
know depth. Diversification is life, while forces working to make all things conform
weaken the health of the system. Even the novice on mystical paths has a sense that
all things are at one and connected. But many get the idea that this means all things
are the same, that they dissolve in some general soup, and that no self ever existed.
The simpletons say that religions all say the same thing. What good does that do?
Selves do exist, they just aren’t all that important or real. And yet to have one that
works is one truly marvelous thing. Before your birth and after your death are vast,
perfect times for perfecting your oneness with the oneness of being. Between is a
short time to be and to dare, to articulate self and identity, and then go out exploring.
281

38.M, Key Words
Divergence, dissociation, disparity, dissonance, dissention, discord, contradiction
Polarization, parting of ways, ambivalence, tension, stress; odd, crafty, perverse
Uniqueness, diversity, contrast, standing out, sticking out, separation, strangeness
To stare, squint as if disbelieving, be astonished; individual nature, distinctiveness
Separateness, aloneness, alienation, incongruity; to stand alone, agree to disagree
Detachment, isolation, aloneness; emphasis, articulation, stress as in highlighting
38.G, From the Glossary
kui2 (to be) estranged, separated, distant, weird, dissociated, divergent, foreign
alien, separate(d), removed, polarized, contrary, unusual, stra nge, opposed, in
opposition, diametrically opposed; (a, the) disparity, estrangement, separation,
polarity; eyes not aligned, moving separately
38.T, Tuan Zhuan
Estrangement
The fire moves, but (only) upwards
The lake moves, but (only) downwards
Two women dwell together
(But) their intentions do not function as one
Enjoyment, along with dependence on clarity
The flexible advances, and so improves (its) conduct
Gaining the center and resonating with the firm
And so it is that ordinary matters (are) promising
Heaven (and) earth diverge, but still their endeavors converge
Masculine (and) feminine diverge, but their objectives interact
The myriad beings diverge, but their affairs (are) interrelated
Estrangement’s timely application (is) very important here!
282

38.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.1: soaking