lks, thus making the oracle more accessible to the less
economically endowed. There may have been a need for an oracle which was
better adapted to answering more of the routine questions of human existence.
There may have been a need for an oracle whose use did not need to be as
495

jealously guarded or controlled by the king because it concerned itself less with
questions central to the maintenance of royal authority. Certainly the Zhou
dynasty itself had begun to decentralize and important decisions were now being
made in more peripheral places. There were reasons for the Yi to gain a broader
exposure.
It is often pointed out by commentators that a major shift in perspective on
the nature of the Zhouyi, as it was perceived by the people who used it, occurred
by the year 602, the date of the sixth Zuozhuan reference. Prior to this date, it is
said, the Yi was perceived as an oracle, or a fortune-telling device. From this date
forward it tends to be viewed more as a book of wisdom and philosophy, ethics
and statecraft. It begins to be cited in rhetorical use, in dialogue and argument, to
support ideological positions. There is, however, one simple and yet crucially
important observation which these commentators have failed to notice or point
out: the authors of the Zhouyi lived their lives centuries before this time. It is not
right to end their discussions with the implication that the Yi might have changed
its own intended  use centuries after its authors were gone. This sort of time travel
was not among their powers. People evolve and mature at different rates, and
perceive what they are capable of perceiving at different stages in this evolution.
It is entirely possible that the authors of the Zhouyi were merely a few centuries
ahead of their time (this is known to occur) and that Spring and Autumn readers
of their work were only now beginning to mature and catch up with the original
intent or idea. Another observation which is never made is that the Yi may have
been intended to be a book of
 psychology more than a book of wisdom and
philosophy. It appears to me to be a book for the adjustment and fine tuning of
attitudes. But of course it is more than that.
There is a growing consensus (which is by no means a proof) that the Zhouyi
underwent a general editing somewhere around 800 BCE, the reign of King X uan.
At the least a number of technical terms (military, for instance) seem to have been
updated near this time. We simply do not know if this editing was done in order
to generalize the Zhouyi's  usefulness to certain br oader segments of society, but
its users were in fact spreading from the Zhou court to the feudal courts to the
feudal aristocracy to the literate class. The version that has survived still seems to
be primarily directed to both young and mature nobility. This developing trend
towards a more rhetorical usage of the Zhouyi, as evidenced in the Zuozhuan, is
explainable by nothing more complex than by its broader circulation. Broader
cultural knowledge and widespread familiarity are not even prerequisites to this
rhetorical usage, as one might assume, as long as it had become fashionable to
quote the respected literary sources of the day. When it has become politically
and socially useful to demonstrate a certain kind of knowledge, that knowledge
will then be gained and demonstrated. This desire to im press and cl imb socially
has single-handedly motivated many a scholar to broaden his education. This
desire alone would spread the cultural literacy needed to understand the meaning
of the Yi texts. Then as the circle widened, the cultural background knowledge
had to spread as well. The guild of diviners had to stay at least one step ahead of
this expansion in their understanding, but their common and secret language had
496

to be leaked to people incapable of completely understanding it. Maybe this was
part confused and part stabilized or clarified by the gradual secularization of the
written word, which w