sions. Many of
these seem to have already become idiomatic expressions prior to their being
incorporated and we have no certain grip on their meaning (the "loss of livestock
in Yi" being a good example, which may be a pun on the word for easy, as well as
being the name of the Yi). A handful of these cultural references also appear in
the Shujing and the Shijing  (referenced above). The modernists would rather not
think of these references as intentionally applied metaphors and analogies.
Instead they would be simple, concrete expressions with narrow, literal meanings,
26

incorporated into the work as mnemonic devices to help diviners rec all the results
of historical divinations. I take issue with this as w ell, and will hold to the notion
that these references already stood for bigger ideas long before the Zhouyi might
have been edited for a br oader readership. The historical anecdotes stood for
broader situations and lessons learned even back then. They were certainly not
being predicted to repeat themselves in every context in question.
To zoom in too tightly on a speculative historical reference and so take it
literally is to lose sight of the fact that each of the Tuan and Yao C i (Hexagram
and Line statements) is supposed to cover 1/(7x64) or 1/488 of the whole of the
human experience. If this is a bona fide historical reference, it can still be no more
than a literary historical allusion (which has perhaps slipped into the language as
an element of cultural literacy) or else it will not begin to cover the ground that it
is assigned to. Suppose that I were to say “I have met my Waterloo” or “I have
crossed my Rubicon.” I am not talking about Napoleon or Ceasar. You need to
know just a tiny bit of history to understand me, and to an extent, the more you
know, the better you understand. But the history nevertheless is not what t hese
statements are about, and the more you think about Napoleon and Ceasar, the
less you think about my own most pitiful plight and the more you will miss my
meaning.
I will agree that we are in a better position if we can learn the details and
specifics of these references, if we can understand them narrowly, and thereby
better our understanding of these allusions. I would hold that the specifics remain
specifics as deliberate entendres, as one layer of what I have called the vertical
ambiguity, but they do not by any means encompass the meaning of the Zhouyi
texts. The trick of course is to develop this conjecture about the bigger ideas
without too much anachronism. Can we know how much of this "broader intent"
is the symbolic interpretation which was overlaid later? This is the question to a
sk
here. An articulate psychiatrist can make the most inane of dreams sound deep
and profound, but this profundity did not therefore drive the dream into being. To
get beyond the modernist assumption of concreteness requires an assumption or
hypothesis that the text of the Zhouyi is not an arbitrary collection of these inane
dreams, that a layer of real meaning exists underneath all of the layers of later
interpretation. I suspect that the authors perceived deeper meanings in many of
these common expressions, i ncorporating many proverbs and sayings as newly
understood, and shared these observations among themselves until they became
common knowledge. For a more western example, Isaiah 40:6 has the interesting
phrase "all flesh is grass." At its source this is a not-particularly-deep comment
about how common our life is on our planet. It takes on a new depth when its
accidental meaning is brought out, relating to the energy and nutrient cycles of
ecology. If I were to use this quotation in an essay on ecology I would be doing
what I suspect the Zhouyi authors did much of: holding a common thing up for a
second look and new insight. This would be an especially fun thing to do with
"omen or 'peasant interpretation' texts."
It is a common activity of the scholars to try to reduce the meaning of a
chapter to