itudinal  context within which the Zhouyi was written,
one must assume a climate full of optimism: it was the dawn of a new era, where at
last sweeping changes could be contemplated. The first few layers of this book
were written in this early morning light, with a new understanding of how and
where things can go seriously wrong in human civilization. Many of history's
lessons were still fresh, some were still bleeding. Some of this wisdom found its
way into the Zhouyi text and into the Early Zhou leadership practices. At least it
appears to have started out well. From the middle of Cheng's reign to the end of
Kang's was a time of
 great peace and few punishments. King M u, the fifth
monarch of the Zhou, instituted the first systematic legal code. But this law was,
of course, no match for the second law of thermodynamics.
493

Religious beliefs evolved gradually. In the more refined and learned circles of
the Zhou court, Shang D i was the highest divinity, but this did not appear to be
an anthropomorphic deity. The spirit of the ancestors was simply the spirit with
which they moved through history, and reverence for this spirit was good reason
to keep it all going. Of course in the more popular or exoteric realms of the com-
mon people and the more near-sighted potentates, this donned the usual garb of
glamour and superstition, of human shapes and lim itations, and so spirit remained
shen and gui, the spirits and the ghosts, and the Shang D i was still the Sovereign
of Heaven. Of little help in this religious evolution were China’s extreme floods
and droughts, disasters and famines. The always restless spirits of weather and
season demanded a great deal of human attention. Therefore, even an enlightened
sovereign or diviner would make regular offerings to spirits and divinities, but
they would do so as much to appease the people as they did to appease the
spirits. The offerings and other rituals had become somewhat more standardized
than they were in the Shang, with fewer "customized" offerings to divine about.
For reasons already discussed, it is important for us to at least try to take the more
esoteric viewpoints on these religious practices. Western historians and trans-
lators of the Yijing will often take the exoteric "understanding" as the intent of
the Yijing’s authors. This is a big m istake, made by the descendants of a race
which gave its God a penis and then denied Him a Wife. In the west, the myriad
beings are the ejaculate of this lonely God. In China, the beings have always been
born from the rubbing together of
 Tian and Di, at the joining of Heaven and
Earth. The ruling upper classes and their advisors would tend to have a more
enlightened view only to the extent that their society rem ained a meritocracy.
This appear to have been maintained for several generations before it grew more
sporadic. Between these and the common people there labored an army of ritual
and religious workers, numbering in the several thousands in the Zhou capital
alone.
The Early or Western Zhou came to a close in 771. The nobility had grown in
strength. The last of the Zhou sovereigns to have much more than a ceremonial
power was slain by an invading tribe from the northwest, with encouragement
and assistance from an enraged noble whose daughter had been replaced by the
sovereign with a concubine. The Zhou heir, named successor the next year, was
now surrounded by strong fiefs. His influence beyond his own domain was now
minimal: he was still charged with performing elaborate rituals and sacrifices. The
capital was moved 200 miles eastward, to Luoyang, and thus the next era is called
the Eastern Zhou. This era is divided into two parts. The first is called the Middle
Zhou or The Spring and Autumn Period, from 771 to 476, which took its name
from the Chun Qiu  Annals. In this era we see the Zhouyi in use as a diviner’s
handbook, primarily through the  Zuozhuan, the fourth-century BCE chronicles of
the historian Zuo Qiuming. Although th