ur honor and hide from yourself.
Humankind will never grow up in this way. A bending received in one’s childhood
is not an excuse worth a lifetime. Victims form a much larger class than innocents.
164

18.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.5: before reforming, three days, after, three days)
Correcting father’s fixations
Use praise
18.5x Correcting father using praise:
Recognition for merit
No child should feel obliged to inherit inferior things. The young heir takes a stand
on behalf of posterity, wanting to be a good ancestor. This truly concerns the family
business, which in the bigger picture is life, evolving on earth, and then the human
place within that and the quality of its culture. And so he goes to work now on what
has been spoiled in the law of his father, the decrees of his king and the discourse
on faith by the family’s priest. Given the scope of this work, the problems we have
created, our wars, our pillage, our parasitism, the mess we are making of earth, are
things to be outgrown, expressions of immaturity. Correction will be more effective
if it is constructive. This will need a wizard, persuasive and tactful, citing the wrongs
but building on rights. If the proposal is not rewarding,  assume that it will not work.
18.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.6: blind ascent, advantage not relaxing the resolve)
Not serving sovereign or noble
Of higher worth is one’s service
18.6x Not serving sovereign (or) noble:
The aim (is) a proper standard
High up on the mountain’s pass the wind is unrestrained. Steady winds of change,
ever brisk and refreshing, are the commonplace thoughts up here. Let the climber
remember, however, that most people spend no time here, so their wildest dreams
are still bound by ancient rules and fears. This one follows no father, no king, no
priest, but works on his own on what has been spoiled. His sights are set beyond,
watching for children to come, and species still uninvented by life. How are king
and noble to come to know these freeman scouts’ worth? The men of conscience,
the conscientious objectors, the satyagrahi, the ones holding true, are truly above
the law and serving higher purposes. They may not come down from the hill bearing
tablets, but they might bring a harder redemption and seeds for competing cultures.165

18, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 17, Sui, Following
qian gua (inverse): 17, Sui, Following
jiao gua (reverse): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress
hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
18, Notes
* 18.0 Gu is a janus word, meaning both toxins and the recovery from toxins. This
was the origin of the character: to make Gu, the poison: put a snake, a scorpion, a
spider, a lizard and a centipede together in a bowl. Then use the remains of the last
survivor to make a slave, cause insanity or work evil (Young boys make this kind of
concoction all the time). This is Bad Medicine: not fresh, not alive and not changing.
* 18.3 The notion that one generation has no right to bind another is an idea that
I first saw explored in the later writings of Thomas Jefferson.
18, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Assiah of Yetzirah
* Tarot: Princess of Swords
* Astrology: Caput Draconis in Air
18, Quotations
* Ah, that ye would renounce all half-willing; and would decide for idleness as ye
decide for action! Ah, that ye understood my word: “Do ye ever what thou wilt.”
But first be one who is able to will. Love ever thy neighbor as thou lovest thyself -
but first be one who can love himself. —Nietzsche, TSZ, #49
* Rough work, iconoclasm, but the only way to get at truth.
—Oliver Wendall Holmes
* Opinions have vested interests just as men have. —Samuel Butler
* Science progresses one funeral at a time. —Max Planck (paraphrased)
* The man who never alters his opinions is like standing water and breeds reptiles
of the mind. —William Blake
* In the practical use of our intellect, forgetting is as important as remembering.