ing celestial rules, but not the
demands of beings in thirst below. Desire and purpose belong to life, not the stars.
What will be a blessing some day is now a troubled hope. But the time is always
perfect for something, not all of life is on hold. What a sage must have or do must
first await better timing. And yet the heavens seem to cater to his wants. What might
such a one sacrifice for rain? His neediness, perhaps, to wait with a greater strength,
working on merit, acceptance and gratitude. Hope is not filling enough. To make the
best use of the meanwhile means to use this time, to wait like there’s no tomorrow.
05.0, Anticipation
Be true
Honor fulfillment
Persistence is timely
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
The real problem here is not how late the rain is: it is how much too early one comes
with one’s mind and its set of big expectations. It is not heaven’s business to cater
to the beings. Heaven could starve us to death and not care, and not have a reason
to do so. It is up to each of the beings to make what provisions it needs. Of course
we will get what we need, as soon as we can look back in time. It is meeting what
might be called needs while looking ahead that causes these questions of why, and
all of their vacuous answers. Needs are more easily met than wants, much more than
wishes and hopes, but none are binding on anything other than life. What must be
done might not be. Stars are said to serve wishes, but wise ones wish now for what
is at hand, and later for what was to come. And not being busy meeting those needs
means they will have a lot of free time, and so can take all of the time that they need.
Some think they can kill time while they are waiting. This is just not a sane thought.
The best sort of patience is artful and moves towards the best place to wait. There
is no better time to cross the great stream than the days near the end of a drought.
83

05.M, Key Words
Waiting, awaiting, readying, earliness, suspense, calculated inaction, patience
Gratification deferred involuntarily, satisfaction postponed, delays, deprivation
Presence of mind, window of opportunity, being properly ready, providing for
Nourishment, necessities, essentials, prospects, hunger and thirst, prerequisites
Doing wit hout, biding time, working on worthiness, maximizing the meanwhile
Making the most of emptiness & want; getting ready, invocation; looking out for
05.G, From the Glossary
xu1 (to be) essential, needful, necessary, insufficient, tantalized, suspended; (a,
the) anticipation, suspense, expectation, desire, demand, need, duty, obligation,
necessity, requirement, prerequisite; (to) wait, await, abide, bide time, postpone,
tarry, stop, defer, do without, watch for, look out for, need, require (s, ed, ing);
Shuowen has stopped by rain, waiting it out instead of waiting for rain; [deferred
gratification]
05.T, Tuan Zhuan
Anticipation
(Means) necessity
Hazards lie ahead
(Be) firm (and) persevering and so avoid complications
This means to avoid affliction (and) exhaustion completely
Anticipation
Be true
Honoring fulfillment, persistence is timely:
(Be) poised, with celestial dignity,
(And), accordingly, upright (and) balanced
Worthwhile to cross the great stream:
To make progress will be an accomplishment
84

05.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.1: well’s mud not consumed, old, nothing to take)
Waiting on the outskirts
Worthwhile to use what endures
No blame
05.1x Waiting on the outskirts:
Not rushing into difficult action
* Worthwhile to use what endures (and) avoid error:
Before losing the principle
He waits by the fence at the edge of the farm, far afield and far removed. Nothing is
compelling. He does only business as usual. If the thing or noise or strange light
off on the far horizon is destined to endure it will need to endure the journey to here.
All things come that are real enough, but why not let nature work some of it out first
and make this time come to him for a change? There’s a good long view