voided: this becomes heat and then light. We do not need to carry the
flame if we carry the know-how to get the flame started. We will not need to carry
whole cultures, but it’s good to cache the brightest parts. Dark’s greatest foe is time.
269

36.M, Key Words
Light, clarity, wisdom, intelligence + hidden, prevented, concealed, suppressed
Discreet, cloaked, dampened, camouflaged, disguised, censored; go underground
Banking, long-term investment, placing assets in durable forms, burying treasure
Turning down the flame, banking the coals; withdrawing one’s consent & support
Covert intelligence, stealth operations, cloak & dagger scenarios, shadow warriors
Self-suppression, repression, making ordinary, dumbing down shrewdly, veiling
36.G, From the Glossary
ming2 (a, the) brightness, clarity, enlightenment, illumination, light, lucidity, lus-
ter; discernment, intelligence (of), perception, perceptiveness, resolution, vision,
eyesight; agreement, covenant; (to be) aware, bright, brilliant, clear, clear-sighted,
conscious, enlightened, evident, explicit, illustrious, informed, intelligent, intel-
ligible, lucid, manifest, perceptive, pure, sa gacious, shining, visionary; plain (as
day and night); (to) assert, awaken, see, brighten, clarify, elucidate, enlighten,
envision, explain, get clear, illuminate, shine, illustrate, make evident, perceive,
show, understand, see (s, ed, ing)
yi2 (to be) hidden, obscure(d), covered, covert, kept out of sight, suppressed,
repressed, common, usual, invisible, level, even, just, equal, smooth, plain, sim-
ple, ordinary, vulgar, foreign, barbaric, distant, injured, hurt, wounded, dark; (to)
hide, obscure, cover, make ordinary, suppress, disappear, fade into context, re-
press, injure, kill, wound, hurt, extinguish (s, ed, ing); (to feel) at rest, at ease,
tranquil, safe, secure, sated, satisfied, full; (a, the) hiddenness, obscurity, cover,
dark, cloak, shroud; need to know, camouflage; without color
36.T, Tuan Zhuan
The light goes within (to) the heart of the earth
Brightness (is) obscured
Inwardly coherent (and) bright while outwardly flexible (and) compliant
Using the obscurity (of) great trials
The Sovereign Wen applied this
Warranting difficult persistence:
Darkening his own light
Inwardly struggling, yet able to stay true to his purpose
Prince Ji applied this
270

36.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity 
(Fan Yao 15.1: authentic modesty, useful crossing great rivers) 
Brightness obscured during flight* 
Dragging one’s wing 
The noble young one in traveling 
Goes three days without a meal 
When there is somewhere to go 
Those in power would gossip
 
36.1x The noble young one in traveling: 
(Has) reasons not to eat 
In times like these great birds are shot down for sport. Mediocrity is the lord here. 
The time has not come for rising above, so he droops his wing and waddles away,  
being unclear and unthreatening, making his tracks not worth covering. Were he to  
let himself eat here, he might betray the predator’s hunger and thirst. Since gossips  
will talk anyway,  if he says anything now he might plant some well chosen rumors  
to send them off in a different direction. But he also has a right to stay silent if any 
thing said can be used against him. While he has somewhere to go, he watches his  
wake through the masses, adjusting his lights accordingly, to leave no impression or  
sign. After three days of bad posture, limp handshakes and vacant eyes, he’ll be so  
happy to be where he’s going, far from main streams, in from the cold, and visible. 
 
36.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay 
(Fan Yao 11.2: embrace the wild, cross without boat, balance) 
Brightness obscured 
And wounded in the left leg 
But relying on assistance 
The horse is strong enough 
Promising 
36.2x Six second’s promise: 
Compliantly using the givens 
He is caught in a trap set for those with less power and light, and wounded in the left  
thigh. This is more an annoyance than fatal, and note that he’s suffer