verall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized,
ripe, seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome,
vital; a lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full) development,
entirety, grand(eur, ness), greatness, gr owth, (great) importance, largesse, major-
ity, maturity, vastness, wholeness; a great deal, (very) much, very; already, com-
pletely, entirely, fully, greatly, thoroughly, wholly, en masse , well-; of (great,
crucial, vital) importance
chu4 (to) take care of, care for, provide for, tend (to), attend (to), keep, raise, rear,
feed, nurture, sustain, nourish, bring up, support, shelter, cherish, train, manage,
cultivate, retain, restrain, tame, (bring under) c ontrol, herd, domesticate, raise
beasts an imals, brutes; accumulate, store up, gather, hoard, reserve (s, ed, ing);
(a, the) nurture, cultivation, culture, domestication, husbandry, management,
training; domestic animal; raising ... beasts
26.T, Tuan Zhuan
Raising great beasts
The firm (is) tenacious
Staunch (and) substantial, bright (and) distinguished
Each day improving the character
The firm rises and honors excellence
The power to stop (with) power
Greatness (means) uprightness
To not dine at home (is) promising:
To nourish excellence
Worthwhile to cross the great stream:
To resonate with heaven
210

26.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.1: correcting father, the young one questions)
This will get harsh
Worthwhile to quit
26.1x (This) will get harsh, worthwhile to quit:
(And) not provoke a crisis
Nurture, training and discipline will sometimes make all of the difference between  
the noble beast and a monster. This young one was born with some spirit. His hot
blood would have him act now, but another possesses a greater power to train him,
and will tighten the restrictions with every rash advance. Not only must he dine at
home, and stay away from any great streams, his immediate ancestor locks him up
in his upstairs room, withholds his share of the family’s fortune and grounds him.
To end the tantrum now is to quit making everything worse. This might have been
an attempt to find where some limits were. Success. His rights and duties are one.
The thing he has just tried to be is just not an option: it is stayed by an upper hand.
Not many things are less fun to be than a spoiled, rich brat with no flatterers around.
26.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.2: adorning his beard)
The carriage is relieved of its axle mounts
26.2x A carriage relieved of (its) axle mounts:
In the center (and) not to be blamed
He makes an honest attempt to not dine at home, to broaden his horizons, to cross
the great stream and see something new. But someone has undone the strap on his
axle and otherwise sabotaged his most noble aims. It makes little difference if these
vandals struck at random or if this is some kind of message: he must dine on this
side of the stream until he makes his needed repairs. We assume he already knows
he can now cover twice as much ground by lightening his load and relying upon the
kindness of strangers, but he does not want to go native in some distant part of the
realm. The traveling scholar, you see, might look like a less worthy drifter. In either
event he still has a great gulf to cross here, and things to learn yet about having class
and the classes. Having the means means so l ittle when you cannot move forward.
211

26.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.3: three set out, lose one, one finds companion)
A fine horse gives chase
Warranting difficult persistence
Daily* training at chariot and defense
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
26.3x Worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
A higher (and) unifying purpose
He has all that he needs - and way too much more. The young noble has a difficult
education ahead. He is given the horse whose spirit will not be broken. The swords
that he trains with are real. The books he studies have depth. Whatever part he plays,
he plays hard