would be likely to miss a more serious layer. Combine this with the fact that
all readers come to the Yi with specific limitations of their own, whether they are
asking a specific question of the Yijing as an oracle, or merely seeking wisdom
from deep within the finite comprehension that is our lot as entities. The result of
this combination is too much narrowness.
I concluded that the only kind of commentary which would avoid this
problem would give more flesh to the text and enrich the metaphors, using the
same sort of evocative imagery as the original statements. It would not, however,
explain what is meant, or define the concepts involved. It might even be more
confusing. This is how the book works: it stimulates the fresh perspectives. With
these thoughts in mind, I perceived a need to keep the original separate, to let the
book speak for itself and limit any embedded commentary to parentheses, and
then footnote the necessary glosses of important or vague Chinese terms and
explanations of the cultural and historical references. The Matrix translation was
the only way I could find to incorporate some of this breadth and depth into a
literal translation. This avoidance of explanation, of course, throws the readers
back upon their own resources and demands independent thought, much as
poetry does, much as our own dreams do. This is also a primary purpose of the
book. “Fortune Telling" is a silly label. "Divination Manual" is better if the term is
properly and most broadly understood. By design, the fountain of wisdom here is
12

the humble reader’s own resourcefulness and their ability to question. Some
experienced readers may already recognize this attitude or approach in  Gua 48,
The Well.
Where the Modernists are Right
For all of the critical things I have said and will say about the modernist
movement, they are making some significant contributions in a few corners of the
field. While their methodologies are inadequate and inappropriate for generating
meaningful translations (even, as they insist, of the original ideas) and their ideas
too shallow to understand the psychological states depicted or invoked by the
Yi's imagery, they are still well suited to digging up historical facts and vignettes
(not to say that they have the big picture in view). One solid benefit of this new
scholarship has been the gradual demythologizing of the Yi’s long, obscure and
often counterfeited history. These studies and theses were among my primary
sources for the historical accounts and notes offered here, primarily in History.
The Bibliography also recommends further reading on the subject.
The modernists are also correct in their thesis that much of what the Yi is
thought to be has been imposed relatively late in the tradition and is not germane
to the  Zhouyi . This includes, for instance, the notions of Yin and Yang and any
mention of the Five Phases. I disagree with their notion that the T rigrams or Ba
Gua did not yet exist in the Early Zhou, although I will agree that many of the Ba
Gua meanings and glosses did not come along until later.
There is a broad tendency within most schools to treat the Shi Yi, the Ten
Wings or Appendices, as a reliable introduction or gateway to the Zhouyi, one
loaded with insights into the structure of the Yi and the m inds of its authors. This
tendency is common in both oriental and western scholarship and it is found in 
all
but the most hard-core academic and modernist treatises on the  Zhouyi  itself.
Where the Shi Yi insights fail (and they fail often) the next recourse is usually to
the commentaries, scholarship and glosses from the Han to the Song dynasties -
instead of back to the original for what has been overlooked. This is not the right
direction: it is us looking backwards in time, reversing the order of things and
mistaking branches for roots. We should not be using speculative interpretations
as algorithms for decoding the original text. Scholarship from the Middle Zhou
onward has added