We sort through the trends and tangled up threads, the
clues, the moments of valor and doubt, the tests passed and failed, to fashion and test
new directions, to wrap up the past in simpler meanings and bring these up into the
present, informing our freedoms with what we have learned and explaining even  the
accidents with newer notions of purpose. Some might dare to look at net progress.
20.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.4: higher purpose not a mistake, but not happiness)
Observing a country’s splendors
Worthwhile and useful to be guest to the sovereign
20.4x Observing a county’s splendors:
(Be) a worthy guest
The best judge hears all of the sides, even extreme points of v iew. But dispassion
and cold objectivity will seldom help him reach truth. Even when all sides are lying,
he will get as close as he can to first hand and occupy these points of view, many
miles in many shoes, many places in many hats, surveying all he can. The outsiders’
perspectives have limits and so going native will have much to offer. A wide-ranging
teacher pauses between the palaces to note how the masses live. Great advantage is
offered to royal guests, and to students at the royal academy, while if and how far
these wonderful benefits reach beyond the palace walls, only the outsider can know.
But even with peasants starving outside, as a guest in the palace, he feasts. It must
be this way, to get the undamaged view. The fair witness must come and go freely.
176

20.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.5: a line of fishes, and palace inhabitants’ favor)
Observing our own lives
The noble young one does no harm
20.5x Observing our own lives
(Means) observing humanity
Looking down from his tower, a young noble studies his life, reading the dreaded
permanent record, trying to be objective, setting new goals and subjectives. With no
magic mirror in which to examine himself, the world will be his witness, and so he
can see himself there, in effects of his guidance upon the lives of his people. He has
much to unlearn as well, pruning excesses and choosing what to lose. The object of
public view is the last one relieved of the need for self-study, the one who rallies the
optimists is often the last one to let go of doubts. He must come to know the human
behaviors, trying not to see himself at the center. This means studying commoners,
farmers, beggars, lawyers and crooks. This is not about what he thinks of himself.
Letting this picture get big enough means losing some of his size and importance.
20.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.6: joining them with no priorities, unfortunate)
Observing others’ lives
The noble young one does no harm
20.6x Observing others’ lives:
The objective is still not objective
Alone at the top of the tower, the young noble’s picture grows ever larger. He tries
to take it all in, with what the wind has to say, what the stars have to show, and what
noble works his hands might do next. The vision must reach through time, to where
we have been and where we are going. But this is not a big picture if it is measured
in years. This is whole species getting invented and going extinct, mountains rising
and getting ground down. Life is all of our lives and all of our relations, a full circle
of different perspectives. Finding no great discouragement, but nothing to boast of
either, with luck he will never be satisfied. The spirit wants reassessment as the body
demands food and breath. Any conclusions? Maybe do as you would be done by,
live and let live, pay your rent, count your blessings and leave a better world behind.
177

20, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 34, Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
qian gua (inverse): 19, Lin, Taking Charge
jiao gua (reverse): 46, Sheng, Advancement
hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 8th Moon (Sept)
20, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Kether in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Ace of Swords
* Astrology: Saturn in Air
20, Quotations
* He, however