Trigrams can be seen or nuanced differently in the Lower
and Upper Places, as Zhen or Hui (Ba) G ua. This Eight House grid offers sixty-four
unique permutations, or different relationships of Subjective to Objective, or positions of
self with respect to the world. And what is this, if not an attitude? The grid is thus a catalog
of attitudes and has the meaning and purpose of a catalog: it describes the available options
as an aid to the making of choices. Or, setting aside the connotations of superficiality, the
options might also be likened to a wardrobe, even unto upper and lower garments.
The Lower and Upper Places of the Hu Ti, the Nuclear, Overlapping or Interwoven
Trigrams, also lend themselves to this kind of binary structural analysis, but here the
meanings and associations are a little more complex as they begin to involve the dimensions
of the individual Line Positions, the Yao Wei, discussed below. The very beginning of th
e
situation or time, represented by Line One, has already been left behind in the Lower Hu Ti.
The commitment of Zhen has begun. The subject’s attitude begins to be modified according
to the real or non-theoretical dynamics of the objective encounter. The choices of skills and
tools required are already becoming apparent. The outcome of the situation or time,
represented by Line Six, has not yet been touched by the Upper Hu Ti. The consequences
or Hui are still inconclusive. The objective is still subject to mid-course adjustments, but
most of the possibilities are already known.
23

The San Cai or Three Powers
There is no evidence at all that the Chinese cultural conception of San Cai, the Three
Powers or Talents, of Heaven, Humanity and Earth, was at work in the Zhouyi composition:
this is probably a Wing dimension. The Shuo Gua (Section Two), nevertheless, speaks of
its role here:
Xi zhe sheng ren zuo Yi ye. Jiang yi shun xing ming zhi li, Shi yi li tian zhi dao, y ue
yin yu yang; Li di zhi dao, yue rou yu gang; Li ren zhi dao, yue ren y u yi. Jian San Cai er
liang zhi, gu Yi liu hua er cheng Gua: In ancient times the wise ones composed the Yi. To
convey, for the sake of compliance, the principles of inner nature and higher order, it was
thus, in establishing Heaven’s way, spoken of yin along with yang; in establishing Earth’s
way, spoken of flexibility along with firmness; in establishing Humanity’s way, spoken of
compassion along with right conduct. Connecting (these) Three Powers, and then doubling
them, resulted in the Yi’s six pictures and (its) completed Gua.
The Xi Ci Zhuan (II.10) also makes this claim. The Tuan Zhuan  uses the Three Powers
frequently. Sometimes this is to scope the range of a Gua’s applicability: Heaven is like
this, Earth is like that, Humanity follows in its own way. Sometimes only the first two are
certain, and therefore humans should do their own version.
While it is claimed that the meanings of the Ba Gua or Trigrams are derived from
the San Wei, or Three Places, it is difficult to see how. It is said that the lowest position is
Earth’s, the middle, Humanity’s and the highest, Heaven’s. The Wings are not helpful here.
Little is said of Ba Gua 
structure other than that their gender (as a Family) is derived here:
where there are two masters (gang) and one subject (rou), this is a daughter; with one
master and two subjects, a son. The Trigram is the same gender as the Line type with the
odd number. The Three Places represent the ages of the children: lowest is eldest, highest is
youngest. See Introduction to Scales, Scales of Three in the Xiao Gua section. There may
instead be an ancient Temporal Scale of Three involved  in the development of the Ba Gua.
As used in the broader Chinese culture, the Three Powers are what may be termed a
Synchronic or Spatial Scale of Three (Xiao Gua, Introduction to Scales). In this Scale, an
equally weighted or valued intermediate is placed in between two other, contrasting forces.
The border between Earth below and Heaven above is H