it will need to endure the journey to here.
All things come that are real enough, but why not let nature work some of it out first
and make this time come to him for a change? There’s a good long view out here,
it is not as though he can’t see this thing coming. There is still time for waiting,
the groundwork and ditches await, and a drought is the best time to clean out the
well. Working those heavy shovels and hoes strengthens that sword arm too. This
will free up some time to come to terms with the present, to get stuff out of the way,
and perhaps even clean up that pit of a house, to be prepared for this big visitation.*
05.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.2: matron loses veil, do not pursue, 7 days to gain)
Waiting on the sand
The small will talk
In the end promising
05.2x Waiting on the sand:
Abundance lies in the middle
* Even though the small will talk
Consider the promising outcome
The rains will always come, sometimes in seven days, or sometimes in seven years,
so here is a workday’s day at the beach, making the most out of little or nothing,
laying back by the edge of the stream, idly watching the high clouds drift by, with
a faraway look for all the big pictures, in limbo and loving it, pondering the changes
and torrents to come, their white waters tearing down rocks, piling up beaches and
dunes with infinite patience. And of course distant voices will slander and gossip,
with petty little abrasives, a less pleasant babble than w ater, but no less ple asantly
meaningless. The small will live any life but their own, with nothing better to do
than you with your nothing at all. So you wait where only the big floods will hit,
on an ample margin of error. Studying time is work best done with large samples.
85

05.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.3: such a lack of restraint, and so, such lament)
Waiting in mud
Inviting predators to approach
05.3x Waiting in mud:
Misfortune waits beyond
* Of our own accord to invite predators:
Attention (and) mindfulness avoid ruin
The long awaited thing has not shown, but everything else has been dropped in its
honor. The meanwhile is as if null and void. Waiting is not going nowhere, just as
not doing is not doing nothing. Calculated inaction invites all sorts of exciting and
complex events, fast fun, and emergencies too. Too ready to be the first to arrive,
waiting where small floods hit first, way down in the lowly depression, too stuck
in only what’s coming, not sure of footing or basis, foreclosing all other options,
one had best heed that sinking feeling. Thieves and predators both like to watch  for
swine who wait in the mud, too sloppy to flee, such a special treat for the slowest
of thieves, such easy bait they will look for traps first. Biding time well is bidding
things come. When they do one wants to be well, but here one loses all firmness.
05.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
Fan Yao 43.4: rump with no skin, inferior progress now, be led
Waiting in blood
Get out of the pit
05.4x Waiting in blood:
Comply on the way to comprehending
Obsessed with the thing not forthcoming, so that nothing else can exist, he limits his
view of objectives. Like standing down in a pit of great depth, his horizons might
be all watched at once. The suspense is killing him. It is eating him alive. The mind
without patience or input will make up things and events on its own, including the
scariest monsters, who so love these deep, dark pits, and can hardly wait to be fed.
Bloody hell! What a trench to die in! What a hole to defend! Unable to maneuver,
or get outside of himself, has himself too well cornered, in a nightmare of a drama.
We are trying to coax him out now, you see, but he still thinks that he is a leader.
This is such a good hole to give up. Better to hunker down in a tunnel, then move
towards the light. What is he waiting for now? Out is simply the way that’s not in.
86

05.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.5: Lord Yi’s da