ce is promising
While regrets pass
The hedge opens with no entanglement
The power in the great vehicle is in its axle’s mount
34.4x The hedge opens up with no entanglements:
Appreciate going forward
The lead man on the battering ram gets the novel idea to give the doorknob a try.
The ram might take a bit longer, but he cra shes through at last, scrambles back to
his hooves and gets free. He will not stop to consider that he might have stumbled
by luck onto the weak spot, but will credit the force expended and possibly struggle
longer the next time. The ram might never unlearn that force is what works. Power
revolves around what works, the finding and opening up of the possible. The wheel
might roll with no axle, but it will not take anything with it. And our vehicles are but
furniture until their wheels are rolling. Power is in the usefulness, or ability to work.
Great power makes use of the still points, axioms, pivotal moments, quiet hearts of a
matter and windows of opportunity. The good hub won’t squeak, let alone rumble.
260

34.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.5: wild greens, dry land, uproot or balance action)
Losing the goat with ease
No regrets
34.5x Losing the goat with ease:
The position (was) not appropriate
The ram bangs away at the fence outside. When all this is followed at long last by
silence, the one in the farmhouse pretends not to notice. But the horrible headache
soon goes away. Obstinacy might have its uses at times, when clever solutions are
scarce. It is harder to lose amidst difficulty. But twice the effort it saves is spent to
contain the damned thing when not needed. A little math might weigh cost against
benefit and make this loss easy to suffer. Then ram strength immortal can have his
green pastures beyond and only serve ewes when he’s wanted. They do say that it
feels so good when you finally stop banging your head on the wall, but this is no
reason to do that. Those brutal and headstrong approaches to living are just beastly
things to let go of. But to drop such a hindrance is a great deal like moving forward.
34.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.6: heaven assists, nothing not advantageous)
The billy goat butts the hedge
No power to pull back
No power to follow through
Not a direction with merit
But problems give rise to opportunities
34.6x No power to pull back,
No power to follow through:
Not examining details
* Problems give rise to opportunities:
The error does not last long
The prodigal ram falls back on his old habits, out at that far frontier of his freedom.
He has tried to butt his way through a hedge and is caught by his horns on a snag.
He cannot go forth and he cannot retreat. He is at his wit’s end and didn’t get far.
It will not be easy for a ram to see that puzzles and obstacles might have different
solutions. Even when his horns become hooks he will not be inclined to pause and
ponder the problems, or the curve of his horns. He will not be free until he, or the
shepherd, or maybe the predator, turns his head around. He can do this indirectly
by trying different perspectives, or seeing things from new angles, or questioning
old directions, or simply pausing to have a quick look around. Sometimes to find
the objective one needs to drop the objective and bring out those other dimensions.
261

34, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 20, Guan, Perspective
qian gua (inverse): 33, Dun, Distancing
jiao gua (reverse): 25, Wu Wang, Without Pretense
hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 2nd Moon (Mar)
34, Notes
* 34.3: I use ram and billy goat interchangeably in this Gua for di yang. This is
permissable: the Chinese text does not distinguish between the two - it can mean
either. There is also some word play with wang3 here: it means nets, webs, snares,
traps, etc., and also wits, subtlety, trickery.
34, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Malkuth in Assiah
* Tarot: Ten of Wands
* Astrology: Pluto in Fire
34, Quotations
*