en right at the start. Some of the lessons won’t wait : the need for them
must be assumed, maybe restraint in the form of restraints. But the object is making
these a part of the subject, discipline grows into self-discipline. Somebody’s ethical
program becomes the child’s second nature. All vines need some structure to climb.
But culture too can unlearn, when tools for this process, like shame, pain and guilt,
fail us all. Consequences can diminish the options and still not diminish the child.
04.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.2: depriving bed of frame, dismissing persistence)
Embracing the inexperienced is promising
Involving the women is promising
The young one can manage the household
04.2x The young one can manage the household:
The firm (and) the flexible interrelate
Old master keeps a vigil as a young son is apprenticed to life, learning how to live.
Loosed among the other young fools, he learns to share and play, fight and retreat.
Loosed among the women he learns to mistrust expectations, and of the family life,
with its palette of diverse points of view. Among his daily duties he learns to trade
effort for value, and thus to weigh value itself against effort. There can be no better
teacher of duty than freedom, or teacher of freedom than duty. He w ill slowly add
real context, training in safe environs as consequence is slowly stepped up. Learning
how to learn and why  will precede what to learn and when. Education is backwards
if the object is to teach someone a subject. The subject will learn when his mind has
objectives. The subject best taught is the student himself, and relevance is the bait.
79

04.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.3: correcting father’s fixations, a little regret)
Not at all useful to court the woman
Who encounters a man with money
And loses self-possession
Not a direction with merit
04.3x Not at all useful to court (this) woman:
(Her) behavior (is) less than responsive
A young fool is being given some fatherly advice, a sample of the way things work,
but artfully lit and properly timed, and before the hormones take over. Too soon will
waste teacher’s time, too late could waste the young man’s whole life, as well as the
whole family fortune. Models of the world and how it should be compete like weeds
to root themselves in young and impressionable minds. Some models invade whole
cultures, and when they do they begin to look like rules. Someone is always needed
to stand outside, look in and share observations. A cultural alpha male might mimic
a natural alpha and go to great lengths to buy up the highest priced brides, not with
strength and character, but with a symbolic merit. Who has the job then to stand up
and say what else this behavior is called? One who does not deserve to be enslaved.
04.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.4: shock to subjugate, three years to big domains)
Afflicted by ignorance
A shame
04.4x The affliction (of) ignorance leads to shame:
Abandoned (and) far from reality
A sure sign of one of two problems: too little guidance is one, too much is the other.
In either case, there is now just one solution. The wise ones ought not to spare fools
the lessons that follow their folly, as long as the fools do not thereby incur lasting
damage or perish, though much can also be said for letting the fools perish young,
denying the world their offspring - for the future of the breed, sooner is often better,
so cultures that survive a long time have more serious rites of passage. But if, for
some silly reason, you happen to think this one is worth saving, the fool being you
or your child, for example, it is time to begin a new program, and abandon the one
which has failed to work. First hand experience teaches; so too does second hand
knowledge. We can learn things in life either way, but we tend to perish first hand.
80

04.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.5: evanescent as sweat, cries; scatter stockpiles)
Yo