ur future, might lie opposed to a
truth which is static or ritual. When it does, a better future can rightly be thought to
come first, and the means which might be questioned today be justified tomorrow.
50.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.2: coming to camp, cherishing resources, get helper)
The cauldron holds substance
Our counterparts have anxieties
This is not in our scope of pursuits
Promising
50.2x The cauldron holds substance:
Be mindful of function here
* Our counterparts hold anxieties:
In the end, no reproach
The nobleman on his journey is careful where he stays. His cau ldron is small, but
sufficient, his meal, sustaining and hot, and his flame is nearly concealed. Having
learned to do more with less, good meals are the least of his worries. He will simply
meet his needs in the order in which they’re important. Somehow his satisfaction
is making his rivals uneasy. He is envied by the wealthy for having no use for gold,
and even reproached by thieves for having nothing worth stealing. These troubles
are not his problem, but are as much a part of a camp as the bugs or the views. Our
best can thrive on simplicity: we don’t need to be gluttons here. Although it might
take a great deal of wealth to sustain a noble class, a class is not what we mean by
nobility. Noble ones work out their own problems first, then they lead by example.
355

50.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.3: not yet across, either go boldly or go across)
The cauldron’s ears have been altered
Its function is impaired
The pheasant’s rich meat is not eaten
A sudden rain would diminish regrets
In the end, an opportunity
50.3x The cauldron’s ears (have been) altered:
Disregarding their significance
He’s fashioned a fine looking cauldron, but the handles are all wrong, maybe placed
according to artful ideals, with little regard for function and balance. Somehow he’s
missed the idea. So his cauldron gets stuck in the fire, as the fat pheasant gets stuck
in the cauldron. Now will his belly begin to resent his artisic direction in life, as he
watches his bird turn black. This could have been handled better. This is a bad way
to sacrifice pheasant: it might as well be crow. Should he try out some frantic rain
dance, hoping to quench the flames? Or is it time to learn to rely on something more
pragmatic, or more scientific than luck? As he gnaws on cold, wet bird, he ponders
designs for accessible cauldrons. A philosophy might look attractive, and sell, but
if we can’t use it it’s not in reach. We need to get a grip, a grasp on practical things.
50.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.4: indulging father’s fixations, ongoing disgrace)
A cauldron with a broken leg
Overturning the duke’s meal
His person is soiled
Woe
50.4x Overturning the duke’s meal:
Trust (was) such a burden
The young servant comes to believe he has already learned and transformed enough,
so he starts to look out for things higher above, perhaps the position of royal chef.
But a master chef or alchemist is never done learning the basics. Creative arts and
sciences change premises and postulates too quickly. And a place of power is no
place to last without changing. This servant could not help but see that broken leg,
but feels compelled to serve the duke’s meal anyway. The meal becomes a stain.
Everything is sacrificed, the sacred is profaned. The shame comes too late and the
servant had best be packing for exile. The next staff has fewer inferior traits, as if
defects were burned off in some kind of crucible. It is good to rise to one’s limits,
even of competence. But a true transformation will upgrade the limits themselves.
356

50.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.5: wrapping melons in willows, display of restraint)
A cauldron with golden ears
And metal grip
Rewarding to persist
50.5x A cauldron (with) golden ears:
In balance in order to effect realities
The cauldron is pleasing and functional, sturdy enough to stand up to