human beings at all. If we are to survive, in any pleasant way,
we will learn that these property rights are nothing more than a trust, for the whole
of life to come, all of the myriad beings, including those beings who might become
more and better than human. Our rights are to the use of the fruits, not to cut down
the tree, not because any one of us says so, but because some day time and the facts
will insist. Wealth is more than attracting the priciest brides, or stoking the envy in
those less well off. But dominion is really no more than making ourselves at home.
140

14.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.5: dragon in flight, rewarding to see a mature one)
Their truths resemble commerce
If also dignified, promising
14.5x Their truths resemble commerce:
Confidence serves to manifest the purposes
* (It is) assuming dignity (which) leads to good fortune,
Naturally, and avoiding pretense
Culture, economics, genetics and climate all obey similar rules. However complex
and chaotic these seem to be, little bits of knowledge can normally be applied to alter
the outcomes or nudge them further from random. The first or most useful of these
is to take some measure of charge over things inside your power and not be a victim
or a leaf in the wind. Things in your power might not include the whole world, but
things like your hands, your wings, your mind and your values. When you merely
do as you’re told the game will play you. Quantity, not quality, will be master and
the size of your pile will measure its value. It’s no wonder the junk that such piles
collect. But a metaphor of commerce does not need to cheapen things. Free minds
and markets are for sovereigns great and small. Our hope lies in merit and dignity.
14.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.6: billy goat butts hedge, problem is opportunity)
Assistance comes from heaven
Promising
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
14.6x Big domain at the top (is) promising:
Through heaven’s assistance
Heaven help us! What shelter is this with no roof or lid? How easily blessings are
gained from the stars! All the space and time we can use, in parsecs of permission.
If you have the proper attitude, protection even covers poverty and loss, while doing
nothing to prevent them. The trick is to keep vision lively, to keep looking around,
down in appreciation or up in awe, back in reflection or ahead in hope, and sideways
for things that you missed. It’s the one track mind that misses the riches, the favors,
the wealth, the solutions to problems and the ways out of trouble. This is all spread
before us, all of the clues that we need. The greatest gift is our gratitude: it’s this that
makes lots of stuff treasure. And divine guardianship is our maintenance problem:
it works best when we work on our value and worth  and stop taking life for granted.
141

14 Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 08, Bi, Belonging
qian gua (inverse): 13, Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
jiao gua (reverse): 13, Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
14, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chokmah in Atziluth
* Tarot: Two of Wands
* Astrology: Uranus in Fire
14, Quotations
* The ass loaded with gold still eats thistles. —German proverb
* Natural wealth is limited and easily obtained; the wealth defined by vain fancies
is always beyond reach. —Epicurus
* I desire ... to leave this one fact clearly stated: there is no wealth but life.
—John Ruskin
* Let him go where he will, he can only find so much beauty or worth as he
carries. —Emerson
* From the Sun did I learn this, when it goeth down, the exuberant one: gold doth
it then pour into the sea, out of inexhaustible riches, so that even the poorest
fisherman  roweth even with golden oars!  For this did I once see, and did not tire
of weeping in beholding it. —Nietzsche, TSZ *56-3
* Valuing is creating: hear it ye creating ones!  Valuation itself is the treasure and
jewel of th