certain amount of sadism is involved. If this can
be established, a very interesting pattern emerges, for most of the population
shows definite masochistic tendencies. It was to these that Professor Linton
referred in discussing a distinctive part of the daily body ritual which is performed
only by men. This part of the rite involves scraping and lacerating the surface of
the face with a sharp instrument. Special women’s rites are performed only four
times during each lunar month, but what they lack in frequency is made up in
barbarity. As part of this ceremony, women bake their heads in small ovens for
about an hour. The theoretically interesting point is that what seems to be a
preponderantly masochistic people have developed sadistic specialists.
The medicine man have an imposing temple, or latipso, in every community
of any size. The more elaborate ceremonies required to treat very sick patients can
only be performed at this tem ple. These ceremonies involve not only the
thaumaturge but a permanent group of vestal maidens who move sedately about
the temple chambers in distinctive costumes and headdress.
The latipso  ceremonies are so harsh that it is phenomenal that a fair
proportion of the really sick natives who enter the temple ever recover. Small
children whose indoctrination is still incomplete have been known to resist
attempts to take them to the temple because “that is w here you go to die.”
Despite this fact, sick adults are not only w illing but eager to undergo the
protracted ritual purification, if they can afford to do so. No matter how ill the
supplicant or how grave the emergency, the guardians of many temples will n
ot
admit a client if he cannot give a rich gift to the custodian. Even after one has
gained admission and survived the ceremonies, the guardians will not permit the
neophyte to leave until he makes still another gift.
The supplicant entering the temple is first stripped of all his or her clothes.
In everyday life the Nacerima avoids exposure of his body and its natural
functions. Bathing and excretory acts are performed only in the secrecy of the
household shrine, w here they are ritualized as part of the body-rites.
Psychological shock results from the fact that the body secrecy is suddenly lost
upon entry into the lapsito. A man, whose own wife has never seen him in the
excretory act, suddenly finds himself naked and assisted by a vestal maiden while
he performs his natural functions into a sacred vessel. This sort of ceremonial
treatment is necessitated by the fact that the excreta are used by a diviner to
ascertain the course and nature of the client’s sickness. Female clients, on the
other hand, find their bodies are subjected to the scrutiny, manipulation, and
prodding of the medicine men.
Few supplicants in the temple are well enough to do anything but lie on
their hard beds. The daily ceremonies, like the rites of the holy-mouth-men,
involve discomfort and torture. With ritual precision the vestal maidens awaken
their miserable charges each dawn and roll them about on their beds of pain while
performing ablutions, in the formal movements of which the maidens are highly
547

trained. At other times they insert m agic wands into the supplicant’s mouth or
force him to eat substances which are supposed to be healing. From time to time
the medicine men come to their clients and jab magically treated needles into their
flesh. The fact that these temple ceremonies may not cure, and may even kill the
neophyte in no way decreases the people’s faith in the medicine man.
There remains another kind of practitioner, known as a “listener.” This
witch doctor has the power to exorcise the devils that lodge in the heads of the
people who have been bewitched. The Nacerima believe that parents bewitch
their own children. Mothers are particularly suspected of putting a curse on
children while teaching them the secret body rituals. The countermagic of the
witch doctor is unusual in its lack of ritual. The p