ly)
Complete commitment
Without mistakes
19.4x Complete commitment, without mistakes:
The position (is) appropriate
He is late in getting started, but this time was spent in good planning. Those who
were watching him breathing and scratching his head now see him fall to the task
with a consummate style, like a waterfall headed for ocean when the bottom drops
out of the river. An artist takes what seems ages to center himself, even months in
preparation, while ink and brush lie motionless. The paintings he makes might only
take minutes, but they could bring enjoyment for centuries. Getting ready is part of
the work. The time spent becoming not lazy, or not half-measured, or not frightened
or not insecure is not. We could easily spend more time in approach than at work,
covering the contingencies, getting the devil’s opinion, overthinking things through.
But these creations rarely show genius or spark. There comes a time to get messy.
170

19.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.5: sweet limitation, promising, merit to continue)
Informed commitment
A great noble's necessity
Opportune
19.5x A great noble has this necessity:
Action in the center has this distinction
A great prince may surround himself with helpers more skilled than he is. He may
appoint one who is more skilled at ruling. He knows where he ends, when to stop
and let others begin. This is no cause for shame. In fact it will give him great face,
with a great grin across it, to be smart enough to pass on tedious work. Authority
can be skeptical and criticize itself without getting caught in a doubter’s paralysis,
or confident and competent without getting caught up in terminal pride. The sage
is not ashamed of being so finite and small: he will make his universe larger still, at
every chance he can take. Humility is a great thing. It will keep the prince honest
and hungry for good information, even if this data contains opposing views. What
sort of leader does not want command of the truths? The center of power is there.
19.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.6: avoiding decrease increases, get help not family)
Authentic commitment
Promising
Nothing wrong
19.6x Authentic commitment has promise:
The objective lies within
At the height of his royal magnificence, the king moves in disguise, in old sandals,
through the districts of workers and peasants, stepping around the broken pots and
people, breathing the gasses of garbage and sewers, visiting hostels, asylums and
prisons, to learn how life is beyond the edge of his w orld, outside of his illusions,
but within his power to change. He lends the royal ear to the talk about the town,
even getting an earful of talk about his rule. The greatest challenge for most is to
go on pretending and to fend off all news to the contrary. The greatest challenge
of all is to carry the true thing forward and help the people learn to be sovereigns
as well. If his power derives from their consent, why not help this grow better and
brighter? This task might not be finished by summer: this is long-term commitment.
171

19, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 33, Dun, Distancing
qian gua (inverse): 20, Guan, Perspective (ref. to 8th month)
jiao gua (reverse): 45, Cui, Collectedness
hu gua (nuclear): 24, Fu, Returning
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 12th Moon (Jan)
19, Notes
* 19.0 Lin is assigned to the 12th Month or Moon (roughly Jan), the time to roll
the sleeves up and get ready to get dirty or undertake the new year. The 8th Moon
refers to the Qian Gua, or Inverse Hexagram 2 0, Guan, Perspective, the time to
step back and contemplate the summer’s work, not to begin it. This re ference,
combined with the assignment of Gua 24, Fu, to the Winter Solstice (11th Moon,
Dec.), indicates that something at least close to what are now called the Sovereign
Gua was among the original Zhou Yi  dimensions. See the Gua assignments to the
Twelve Moons (Dimensions, Shi Er Di Zhi).
19, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Netzach