th the food set before him is that it’s fuel. If he only could work up an appetite
and sacrifice some of this stuff to his higher purpose. Or maybe he could sacrifice
some of his losses and poor expectations. Jaded and sated mean having too much.
How does he now have so little? Maybe starving himself is his way to grow hungry.
337

47.3, 6 3rd, Zhu Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.3: the ridgepole is deformed, ominous)
Oppressed by stones
Grasping at thorny brambles
Going into his house
But not seeing his wife
Unfortunate
47.3x Grasping at thorny brambles:
Relying on the firm
* Going into his house
But not seeing his wife:
Not a happy omen
Does it give him that special feeling to have the world turn against him? His dark
dispirit paints frowns on the stones. He fancies them cold to the touch and uncaring,
weighing him down, rumbling and grinding and coming to crush and oppress him.
He goes to great lengths to prove they will not support him. Hard-pressed between
walls closing in, he denies himself even a handhold. Girding his loins with thistles,
crowning himself with thorns, he will not need to look far for a cause to complain.
Why not a hair shirt as well? At some time not so long ago, he even had a good wife,
who waited for him to come home. Maybe she just grew tired and left, maybe she is
just hiding until this phase of his passes. He may even consult us again, until he gets
some even worse news, or until he can misrepresent something a little more cheerful.
47.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.4: necessities handed expediently through the window)
Approaching slowly and gravely
Oppressed inside a gilded chariot
But this embarrassment will find an outcome
47.4x Approaching slowly (and) gravely:
The purpose remains subordinate
* Although less than properly positioned
There will be support
It exhausts him to handle his fine, gilded chariot. Perhaps he even feels as though
he pulls the thing himself, still with the brakes on, of course, and yet all that he really
needs to do is think a little and steer. If this lack of abundant energy were really the
problem he wants it to seem, he could find a less transparent ruse. The slow-motion
effort is far more exhausting than a far more exuberant pace, and this could take him
four times as long just thinking and steering too much. He would even save energy
if he just got out and crawled. Many responsible things remain to be done, so many
plans that might fail. If he only had fewer friends he could count on. An end will be
attained, but at embarrassing speed, with costs in horses and brakes. Good thing his
horses don’t bite. Do we even ask him why? What is he afraid of, or guilty about?
338

47.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.5: noble in bondage still holds freedom, promise)
Nose cut off, feet cut off
Oppressed by rouge-sashed ministers
And then gradually finding relief
Worthwhile and productive to sacrifice this sacrifice
47.5x Nose cut off, feet cut off:
The purpose is still not gained
* And then gradually finding relief:
Due to the center’s (being) straightforward
* Worthwhile (and) productive to sacrifice (this) sacrifice:
To suffer happiness
He is humbled by his own high position and tired out by his duties. His ministers
do their best: they haunt his nights and oppress his days. They bathe him in tepid
water and dress him up in special uniforms. They force him to walk to the altar and
make his libations and offerings. What more could he sacrifice for them? They’ve
even taken his nose and his feet. What is a poor sovereign to do here? What a fate
for a great potentate! All the ministers get for their efforts is purple in their knees.
But they always bow with such menace. This way is not working out well. Things
are too circumscribed. Maybe he thinks he gives up too much for his people - but
really he might just be thinking too much. Maybe he could give up these thoughts
about sacrifice. The tepid baths could go too: maybe a deep tub with