ff. Oppression at the hands of the man with the
purple knee bands. Joy comes softly. It furthers one to make offerings and
libations. b) Thus one attains good fortune. (Wilhelm)
* Nose cut off, feet cut off. Oppressed by rouge-sashed (ministers). And then
gradually finding relief. Worthwhile (and) productive to sacrifice (this) sacrifice.
47.5x To suffer happiness.
Our subject here is a noble or a sovereign (line 5) with the ability to make
command decisions. But his life is being moved by forces outside his control
because he is being so purely passive in all things. He has adopted the victim
mentality. Maybe next time they bathe him they could use ice water. This is an
example of parody, satire or caricature, and this device may be found in every line
of this particular Hexagram. The Hexagram itself has being stuck in rut, a mindset,
an expectation, or a frame of reference, as a good portion of
 its central theme.
Given this, it is not surprising that the text attempts to get the reader outside
looking in and laughing at the victim's approach to life.
50.3
* The third line, undivided, shows the caldron with the places of its ears changed.
The progress of its subject is thus stopped. The fat flesh of the pheasant which is
in the caldron will not be eaten. But the (genial) rain will come, and the grounds
for repentance will disappear. There will be good fortune in the end. (Legge)
* The cauldron’s ears (have been) altered, its function (is) impaired. The
pheasant’s rich meat is not eaten. A sudden rain (would) diminish regrets. In the
end, an opportunity.
This is parody, satire or caricature again. This situation has been grossly
mishandled and you can’t get a grip. Here too is an example of common ideas
crossing cultural boundaries and used as images, metaphors and finally puns in
556

both cultures. If the cauldron represents, let us say, your philosophy of life, it
lacks practical application. The cauldron appears to have been redesigned either
by artists or by art critics. The most you can do now is pray for rain to put out the
fire, to salvage what's left of the fat, juicy pheasant. And rethink the relationship
between form and function. The Gua theme concerns pragmatism, the application
of reliable methods in the cultivation of m erit and a superior culture. Empty ritual
and show do violence to this objective.
53.4
* The wild goose gradually draws near the tree. Perhaps it will find a flat branch.
No blame. Wilhelm says: “A tree is not a suitable place for a wild goose. But if it is
clever, it will find a flat branch on which it can get a footing.” p. 207. (Wilhelm)
* The wild goose advances by degrees to the trees. Perchance to find that flat
branch. No harm done.
A similar image appears in the Shijing at 1.10.8, with geese fighting for
balance in a Jujube tree, so this image was apparently known to the culture as a
whole and may have been proverbial. Geese, of course, have floppy webbed feet,
not mighty talons able grab hold of anything but mud and water. The call here is
for acceptance, patience and adaptability but the image is a caricature, or a Gary
Larson cartoon. The goose, if he fails, can always waddle around on the hill, with
a view almost as good as an eagle's.
57.6
* Crawling below the bed. He loses what is required for his traveling expenses.
Persistence brings misfortune. (Blofeld) [In line two, a rabble of diviners and
wizards are used]
* Subtleties happening under the bed. Losing some valuables (and) an axe.
Constancy has (its) pitfalls.
This happened only recently, down in Line 2.  Our subject has now been
comforted, and laid all doubts to rest. His Wushi have assured him that this was
only a couple of spooks trying to wear him down. But this time the "spooks" are
really there, and run off with his money and his axe. The symptoms are the same,
but the disorder is entirely different: different kind of spirits this time, spiriting his
stuff away. As Xun4 doubled, this is the 
"thinking twice" Hexagram. He