places to go chosen wisely. This means measure and budget, proper restraint and
proportion, ratios and rationality. But the artificial constraint which does no honor
to natural law will not work: the water will find ways around it. Good boundaries are
positive tastes, not restrictions. If choices are limited, the wise choose the best ones.
60.0, Boundaries
Fulfillment
Bitter limitations do not invite commitment
The world is far too big for one life. The options open to us are too vast and breed
far too fast to act them all out. One person cannot even walk all of the possible paths
through one tiny field. We cannot catch all the water in our miniscule pools, but we
can choose what to keep and what to let pass. There are forms of life which know no
internal limits, but these parasites and cancers kill themselves by killing their hosts.
One measured step at a time: so grows the bamboo, in simple, attainable intervals.
We regulate our behaviors, and of course we also take this too far. We make wars
between the aspiring spirit and the body’s sensitive balance. We lay restrictions on
others, when afraid to be and do good alone and lead instead by example. There is
indeed one great moral law: to respect the rights of others. But the moralist does not
respect this. Tastes and choices are needed when our limits are reached, but to make
them too hard or too soon w ill leave one empty in times of fulfillment and take all
the joy out of living in danger on earth. Learning to follow natural law will ask what
life is and needs first, to optimize limited resource. Guilt lives less than innocence.
413

60.M, Key Words
Limitation, abridgment, articulation, definition, order, discipline, discrimination
Terms, terminus, stipulation, condition, restraint, constraint, regulation, stricture
Economy, moderation, self-control, measuredness, budgeting, thrift, allocation
Due proportion, proper balance, ethical measure; the golden mean or middle way
Systems of moral regulation and division, measured steps, discretion, specificity
Epicurean hedonism, good taste with rational choice, caution, intelligent selection
60.G, From the Glossary
jie2 (to be) restrained, constrained, moderate, temperate, controlled, articulated,
limited, regular, defined, definite; (a, the) limit, restraint, constraint, limitation,
regulation, (regular) division, rule, law, moderation, temperance, control, dis-
cipline, term, boundary, condition, articulation, article, joint, node, knot, period,
time, degree, detail, section, segment, juncture, chapter, abridgement (s); (in due,
duly) proportioned, in proper balance; (to) regulate, discriminate (s, ed, ing)
60.T, Tuan Zhuan
Boundaries (mean) fulfillment
The firm (and) the flexible (are) evenly apportioned
While firmness secures the center
Bitter limitations do not invite commitment:
This path dead ends
Satisfaction behind movement at risk
An appropriate place to use boundaries
Balanced (and) principled in order to follow through
Heaven (and) earth (are) constrained
And so the four seasons are completed
Boundaries serve to define the measures
(But) without encroachment on property
(And) without harm to the people
414

60.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.1: twice the exposure, into canyon’s inner chamber)
Not going past the door to the courtyard*
No blame
60.1x Not going past the door (to) the courtyard:
Knowing free course (to be) hindered
A real abundance of water would be pressing at the dam with more urgency or force.
He already seems to know that when new prospects are ready they will also be more
compelling. This is not a lack of adventurous spirit, but practice of proper discretion.
There is quite simply no driving reason to go now, and outside the weather is nasty.
He is not even drawn halfway towards the street yet. There are plenty of things to do
while he waits, a pleasant journey made from walking to and fro, thousands of steps
without leaving his mind, thrills to be had in counting up heartbeats: this t