eater contexts
and challenges will more likely cure us of snobbery than it will foster conceit. The
superior man is a humbler man, in spite of all he has conquered. Selection brought
this tribe far, but we may still want heirs who can walk more erect and think better
than we, their primitive ancestors. Some will follow and seek, others track and find.
To be the best that’s within us, to get past ourselves, we need the unequal outcomes.
17.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua* 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.6: without pretense, but still suffering, no merit)
Seize and bind them
Then follow, holding them fast
The Sovereign* will offer a sacrifice at the Western Mountain
17.6x Seize (and) bind them:
At the top (is) extremity
The followers of a toppled tyrant are seized and bound and being taken to sacrifice.
They were only following orders, doing as they were told. But now they are held to
account for their actions, for their law-abiding crimes against humankind. The king
will be on the high ground here, making some examples of the things not to follow.
These will not be lambs or young goats; nor are they innocent victims. Where does
one’s innocence end and culpability begin? Can a conscience be required? There is
a higher law and a justice to go with it. There are consequences to what we follow,
or what we attach ourselves to. It is for us to step up and do the right thing, even in
times that we are alone. We need not be told what truth is to be true. This is a part
of what will finally stop war: people must learn to destroy or undo their own tyrants.
159

17, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 18, Gu, Detoxifying
qian gua (inverse): 18, Gu, Detoxifying
jiao gua (reverse): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
17, Notes
* 17.6 This is word play on the zhi Gua ming, or resultant hexagram name, Wu
Wang, Without Pretense. The Sovereign here is Wu Wang, fo under of the Zhou,
who conquered the tyrant Zhou Xin. The tyrant’s closest followers, those holding
positions of leadership, were beheaded in a sacrifice (see also 30.6), while the
more innocent received new citizenship. There are consequences to Following
wrongly, without conscience: Following does not give up duty or responsibility.
The best Western parallel is the Nuremburg trial, where the defense was "I was
only following orders."
17, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Briah of Atziluth
* Tarot: Queen of Wands
* Astrology: Sagittarius Ascending, Mutable Fire
17, Quotations
* Believe nothing, no matter where you heard it or who said it, even if I have said
it, unless it agrees with your own reason and your own common sense.
—The Buddha (paraphrase)
* It is forbidden to decry other sects; the true believer gives honor to whatever is
in them that is worthy of honor. —Emperor Asoka, India
* One requiteth a teacher badly who remaineth only a pupil.
—Nietzsche, TSZ, 22-3
* People never bother to think that a doctrine might not accept them.
—Idries Shah, Caravan of Dreams
* He does not believe that does not live according to his belief. —Thomas Fuller
* There are men, who, by their sympathetic attractions, carry nations with them,
and lead the activity of the human race. —Emerson
* This thing we tell of can never be found by seeking, yet only seekers find it.
 —Sufi saying
* Be it remembered that we command nature, as it were, by obeying nature's laws.
—Haliburton
* You dangle a carrot in front of her nose and she goes wherever the carrot goes.
—Aleister Crowley
* If you ain't the lead dog, the scenery never changes. —Lewis Grizzard
160

GUA 18, GU3, DETOXIFYING
 
  Binary 011 001 = 25; Xun below, Gen above
18.X, Overall Image
At the base of the mountain is wind
Detoxifying
The noble young one, accordingly,
stirs up the people to fortify character
The wind is stopped and thrown back on itself. The root encounters a stone with
no cracks. This is going nowhere. The wind cannot be captured alive, except with
wings to keep