the fine time worth  saving up for? What does a peak experience
justify? Fulfilling ourselves or our duties, fulfillment is freedom: it lets us move on.
213

26, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 45, Cui, Collectedness
qian gua (inverse): 25, Wu Wang, Without Pretense
jiao gua (reverse): 33, Dun, Distancing
hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
26, Notes
* 26.3 Most of the received texts, including very old sources like the Mawangdui,
have Yue, saying or speaking, instead of ri4, day or daily, in this line. Nonetheless,
many recent translators and scholars have emended the text here. See Source Text
Discrepancies & Emendations, following the Matrix translation. The use of ri4 at
26.T also suggests this emendation. If pressed, I would translate yue xian yu wei as
“Vowing to train at chariot and defense,” which  would preserve some of the impli-
cation of dedicated sacrifice suggested by the Zhi Gua.
26, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Malkuth in Assiah
* Tarot: Ten of Pentacles
* Astrology: Pluto in Earth (vis. plutocracy)
26, Quotations
* If men have not that in them that fits them to precede others, they are without
the way proper to man. They ... can only be pronounced defunct monuments of
Antiquity. —Zhuangzi
* If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.
—Sir Isaac Newton,  paraphrasing Bernard of Chartres, 12th Cent.
* When we are planning for posterity, we ought to remember that virtue is not
hereditary. —Thomas Paine
* The ultimate test of a moral society is the kind of world it leaves to its children.
—Dietrich Bonhoeffer
* The ultimate result of shielding men from the effects of folly is to fill the world
with fools. —Herbert Spencer
* We do not inherit the earth from our ancestors; we borrow it from our children.
—Haida Indian saying
* Some believe all that parents, tutors, and kindred believe. They take their prin-
ciples by inheritance, and defend them as they would their estates, because they
are born heirs to them. [also Gua 18] —Alan Watts
214

GUA 27, YI2, HUNGRY MOUTH
 
  Binary 100 001 = 33; Zhen below, Gen above
27.X, Overall Image
Beneath the mountain is thunder
Hungry mouth
The noble young one, accordingly,
is careful with words and expressions
And moderate in drinking and eating
Thunder lies deep in the mountain: a rumbling deep in the belly, or a great potential
for energy. The volcano awaits an abundance of pressure. The light waits in the food
for its freedom. In unexplored mines, on the hoof, in the silos, in a life unexamined,
energy lurks in its latent forms, locked up as a potential. Then there are the nutrients
to go along with the calories. Now just add an appetite and an open mouth to feed,
and then there can be nourishment. The wise attend the gaping mouth, food going in,
speech coming out, since food for thought can be wholesome or toxic as well. We
can choose our menus and our hungers too, according to what we would nourish.
27.0, Nourishment
Persistence is promising
Study the hungry mouth
From the searching mouth to the feeding
Getting to know the true and false hungers and choosing to feed what is best and
right, the wise will make agreements between their competing needs and select what
goes into their makeup. Concern for the fuel is regard for the flame. Know others
by their hungers and wants and infer what they seek to nourish by what they chase
around with jaws agape and snapping. Who and what a body becomes is made up
out of this diet. Who and what the mind becomes is assembled out of experience.
Who and what spirit becomes is also a part of the food chain. There are those who
eat all things in sight and those who’ll believe every thing that they hear. There are
diners with excellent taste and those who just pick to be picky. Then there are the
nervous birds and those who will worry themselves halfway to death over whether
a meal is healthy. The attractions of combustible substances, those matters at hand
th