ecially if one is able
to turn error around into wisdom. When measuring a direction from self, instead of
from a path, all straying is done in forward directions, not sideways. Turning around
to go back home is also a forward progress. But sometimes this is uphill both ways.
199

24.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.3: hunt captures great leader, no call for haste)
Repeated returns
Difficulty
But no blame
24.3x Repeated return has (its) difficulties:
Deserving no blame
He comes home to rest from a hard day’s work, but he will return tomorrow,  only
to do it all over again. What he does during the day falls apart a little less completely
each night, so there may be an end in sight. And every seventh day he can rest and
recover a little. This wheel of toil and trouble is supposed to turn towards a brighter
tomorrow, although most are dragged in circles until they drop in the dust. So what
is the difference which leads to no error or blame? They say that it is insane to do
the same thing over and over and keep expecting different results. The right thing
to do then is to get some different results, with wise investment at home, learning to
do more with less and getting back to the basics. It is not a resignation to this way
of life. But any truly great work will keep one coming back, just like petty tasks will.
24.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.4: the shock is followed by muddledness)
Walking in the middle, all alone in return
24.4x Walking in the middle, all alone in return:
In order to follow the path
He thought he might find his way with this group, but little of what he learns here
will be a part of his whole life’s path. It was somebody else’s journey. Things did
remain to be learned before they could be brought home. Perhaps in a week on the
road all he will gain is one memory, the odd look on somebody’s face, or a clever
thing to say the next time, or a bit of assertion to groan about later. To his private
context he takes what little he needs, but a little is plenty if what he returns with is
seed. So this all came as a big surprise, just when he thought it was going so well.
The road taught him this: it goes two directions at once, each with ups and downs.
The path of a higher purpose is only half as crowded, even if it is twice as lonely.
But suppose that he’d learned this nearer the end, and had twice as far to go back.200

24.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.5: collecting one’s riches, persist in right amount)
Honest return
With no regrets
24.5x Honest return, with no regrets:
Concentrating in order to examine oneself
This time he went way too far out. The path went  on forward, yet he came back, and
will not do things that way again. To stay your own best friend after a misadventure
like this needs more than forgiveness, but to whip yourself for acting the fool is to
play the fool twice. So he had a rough time, made a mistake, believed wrong things,
drank and turned into a jerk, got angry and lost a few friends. We need to turn our
regrets into lessons. Honesty stings, but the toxins dishonesty swallows will kill us.
A straightforward, critical inventory is the shortest way back home, less loops than
shame or guilt or repentance. Good judgment might pronounce some atonements,  
but it takes the best lessons forward: ahead is work to be done, a smarter life to be
lived and consequences to own. Why live out our years in me mory of our regrets?
24.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua* 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.6: at the source of appetite, brutal but promising)
Lost return
Ominous
There will be calamity and grave errors
If trying to advance the military
In the end there will be a major defeat
Reaching one’s domain and its nobility with misfortune
Even after ten years, no ability to campaign*
24.6x Lost return comes to misfortune:
The opposite of a noble course
He gets hooked on his highest hope, like a fish gets hooked on b ait, gobbles it up
and swallows it whole and is