o harm done
63.1x Braking those wheels:
Deserving no harm
The driver succeeds in crossing the water and cuts loose his horses to graze on the
farther shore. But in his hurry to rest here, he underachieves a bit. He brakes a little
too soon and gets stuck in the mud. This is more work than expected, but at least he
has made it across. It is past time to make great mistakes: even disasters are small.
So what is a little backsliding? He loses a point for his dismou nt. Transitions from
movement to rest are not made in instants. When at last he’s across the half-frozen
stream, the brave, young fox is exhausted, and anxious to rest. As he flops himself
down on the far shore, he learns that his tail was only almost across. This tail takes
hours to dry, but to dry it mid-stream would have been worse. Our loose ends and
remaining details sometimes take half of the work. The way likes to tease final form.
63.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.2: waiting on the sand, the small will talk)
The matron loses her carriage’s veil
To not pursue this
Means seven days to gain
63.2x Seven days to gain:
By taking the middle path
Her new carriage still has that new carriage smell. All else remains constant. But this
missing detail blows itself out of proportion. The lady must travel in a conspicuous
imperfection, in less than the perfect style, exposed to the crude stares and gruesome
desires of common, everyday people. The weaver claims to be too busy to cater to
such small items, but he might have time to fill the order next week, when he can fit
a small thing into his schedule. It only took seven days to build the entire carriage!
If she comes undone in the head, she will show her neighbors that she is not a lady
and the folks will have a whole week  of comic relief. The lazy weaver will tease her
if she stays home fretting and fuming. Dignity might best be shown by moving on.
Success in small matters might not be much, but in small matters failure is worse.
433

63.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao* 03.3: pursuing the deer unprepared, lost in the woods)
The illustrious ancestor* subjugated barbarian country
It took three years to conquer them
Lesser people were not at all useful
63.3x Three years to conquer them:
Exhausting
Like the stories tell it, Gao Zong attacked the Gui Fang, land of the Devils. He made
a legend in the process; some day he might be a myth. But while alive he was flesh,
exhausted flesh doing dangerous work, taking twice the effort expected, and costing
him years of his life. Nor could he quit when done, as devils love to regroup. All that
remains is history and lessons. He no longer hurts, or aches for his family at home.
Now that this is over and done with, the reality of it all faded, folks still tell the story,
and like comparing themselves to the heroes, faring so well in their dreams. The kids
play with Wu Ding* dolls now. Stories don’t tell the smell of the blood, or the pain
of a sword in the belly, but to understand the lessons, some of that urgency felt then
will need to be recaptured. Competence and fitness were taught in that curriculum.
63.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.4: regrets pass, stay true, change the highest laws)
The silk jacket will wear into caulking rags
Throughout the day be on guard
63.4x Throughout the day on Guard:
There are reasons for uncertainty
His boat is finished and ready to sail on even the stormiest waters. He climbs aboard
at the launching, clad head to toe in the finest silk garments. And right by his side is
his old friend Doubt, that pesky old pessimist, getting all excited at the smallest gray
clouds, running around inspecting for leaks, moaning creaky duets with the rigging.
But Doubt will earn his passage here. The whole second half of eternity lies in wait
to ruin this boat. Time will indeed do horrible things, both to new boats and to these
fine, silk garments. And when that time finally arrives, that lovely silk jacket of his
w