ets-in-Signs and Sephiroth-
in-Worlds. There is not enough space here for further explanation or apologies, but
note the geometry of these on the Xian Tian grid in Dimensions. This geometry
carries into the inherent geometry (or grammar) of all four of these languages. For
example, the Yijing correspondences w ill exhibit bilaterally symmetrical patterns
when graphed onto the  Tree of Life of the Qabalah*. There has, over the centuries
in each of these systems, been a lot of mindless and thoughtless reassignment and
transposition of correspondences. This amateur tinkering is usually done by
 one
versed in only one of the systems. The attempted rectification taken up here has not
been undertaken lightly or in haste.
The heart of this system, as it relates to the Yi, lies in the Yi’s Ban Xiang, or
Half-Image dimension, and in the meanings of the Zhen and Hui Gua, as discussed
in the Dimensions. The combining of two symbols into one, which the astrologer
Marc Edmond Jones called Portmanteau Analysis, is a common feature to all four of
these languages. The term Portmanteau, a suitcase with pockets on both sides, was
used by Lewis Carroll’s Humpty Dumpty to describe the blending of two words
into one.
It is important to note in this context that correspondence (ying) means “to
resonate with” and not “is equal to.” It would be more of a loss than a benefit to
equate these four languages. The four systems raise similar issues, deal with parallel
themes, and use nearly interchangeable metaphors, but each has its own unique
identity and history. The common denominator is not some prior Rosetta Stone, or
even Jungian archetypes. It is, ultimately, early humanity’s struggle to understand
resonance: between the mind and the world, and between both of these and Number
(this is discussed in more detail in Xiao Gua). The differences in points of view
between the systems remain significant. One of the ways to appreciate these differ-
ences is by way of an analogy with our own eyes: two differering images are sent to
the brain. It is by way of the differences between the two images that depth is best
perceived, by a brain which integrates the two rather than choosing between them.
This phenomenon is called retinal disparity. I
n other words, to resolve these differ-
ences “perfectly” would be to flatten the image and texture and lose some of our
dimension of depth.
55

*Note: The Hebrew word Qabalah or Kabbalah, which roughly means
“received (wisdom),” has many alternative spellings. It has be come an accepted
practice to make these spelling differences meaningful by letting Kabbalah refer to
the system of strictly Jewish mysticism with its Hebrew texts, letting Cabala refer to
the school of interpretation by Christian mystics and letting Qabalah refer to the
Hebrew tradition plus the complex extrapolations of Western Hermeticism. The
actual spelling is Qoph Beth Lamed He or QBLH. For more on this subject see:
Xiao Gua: Introduction to Scal es; and also Dimensions: Correlative Thought and
Ban Xiang.
Key
(*** If you have this text in electronic form, such as .pdf or .doc,
use these keys with your “Find” command to avoid scrolling)
111 011
***
The Gua or Hexagram Written Sideways. If you enter this
you do not need a lookup key. Note the space in the middle.
1st line is left, top line is right; 1 = Yang, 7 or 9; 0 = Yin, 6 or 8
This example is Wind over Heaven
GUA 09 The Hexagram, Gua, Diagram or Chapter Number
09.X
***
Da Xiang or Overall Image, Part of Wings 3 & 4
Not the oldest of the texts, but the best introduction
09.0 The Tuan or Judgment,
The Original Zhouyi Statements
09.M,
Key Words
Assorted meanings and general Gua themes
Find: 09.M ***
09.G, From
the Glossary
The Gua name, taken from the Glossary
The Glossary has additional information on the Characters
09.T Tuan Zhuan or Commentary on the Judgment, Wings 1 & 2
This commentary is sometimes (but not always) relevant
09.6, Top 9 Yao Ci or Changing Line Text.
The Original Zhouyi Line Sta