hi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.1: cushioning with white mats, make no mistakes)
Vigorous in advancing the toes
Going forward is less than successful
Mistakes will be made
43.1x Without success and yet proceeding:
Erroneous
Maybe he wants to take a strong stand, or firm steps, or to stomp out that nameless
threat, or even kick some troublesome butt here. There’s trouble afoot in these times,
or something is stepping on toes and this makes him hopping mad. It is high time
someone did something. But even when powerfully done, advancing the toes does
not make for great strides. Here should the whole being stride, including its head for
guidance. While toes can test for obstacles too, the head has two eyeballs for seeing
where it is going and a brain for thinking things through. The thing he chases might
have a head as well. A little bit of wisdom used in advance might pause long enough
to get the bigger picture and locate the source of the trouble. Then one can run, even
race with the facts. Or maybe small steps, one at a time, will set a more useful pace.
43.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.2: complete the day, as change comes, expedite)
Frightened and calling out
This is not a night for battle
Do not worry
43.2x Do not worry about hostilities:
Find the middle path
There is a backlog of change overdue. One of these nights it might come without  
a clear warning. No need can be shown now for these haunted and sleepless nights.
No unseen invader has given a sign. And yet he paces his floor, cries out for help
and rattles his shields and swords at the night. Such guardedness, if not watched,
becomes a way of life, already taking him prisoner. Of course he might be justified
in fearing an attack might come soon, but even here his own worries will defeat him:
his cries of alarm and his rattling swords are preventing him from listening for his
enemy's approach, and it is also giving away all his defensive positions. If change
is to come it can slip through this din unnoticed. Even defeat will not be this noisy.
A foe worth fearing will be stealthier and darker than this. One wants to be rested.
313

43.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
Fan Yao 58.3: future joy, disappointing
Vigorous in the cheekbones
Presuming the worst
The noble young one is resolved and decided
All alone in advancing, to greet the rain
As if getting wet
Were displeasure
Nothing is wrong
43.3x The noble young one (is) resolved (and) decided:
In the end no harm (is) done
The relentless pursuer and the fugitive he pursues wear almost identical faces: too
strong in the gaze, looking stubborn and obsessed, suspiciously nervous and tense.
Their expressions of dark and mysterious purpose are not all that hard to confuse,
except with each other. Both end their days much bespattered, and the subjects of
much muddled gossip. The fugitive tries to look and act like a lawman, while the
gendarme wants to think like his criminal. The signals they give are odd and unclear.
Bystanders cannot decide who is who. They develop a very close bond in this way.
This obsession of course has a purpose, hopefully one with an end and no future.
Here and now is limited living and no place to be. This bad-looking hombre, with
his wet-dog smell and his stubble, will not see the good life until the trial is over.
43.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.4: waiting in blood, get out of the pit)
A rump with no skin
One’s progress is inferior now
To be led like a sheep, regrets would pass
But to hear the words is not comprehension
43.4x One’s progress (is) second-rate now:
The position (was) not appropriate
* To hear the words is not comprehension:
Quick to hear (but) not much clarity
In hottest pursuit, he chases his nameless, accursed, unspeakable thing into some
deep, dark pit, thinking that he might have it cornered at last, all the while forgetting
that accursed things thrive best and fight at their fiercest down in the deep, dark pits.