vior.
4) The Ten Wings (which, together with the original text, or the  Zhouyi ,
constitute the Yijing) are a reliable introduction to the thought pr ocesses of the
original authors and present the dimensions of thought which explain the origin
of the words of the text and its prognostications.
5) Modern academic scholars, armed with a formidable array of tools from
such scientific methods as archaeology, etymology and context criticism, are be-
coming grounded in an unprecedented degree of certainty and are now well on
their way to a new and more enlightened understanding of what the original
authors were actually writing about.
6) No evidence exists to support the existence of the Ba Gua or Trigrams
at the time the original Zhouyi was written. These did not come into being until
the Spring and Autumn period of the Eastern Zhou, centuries later.
7) The key to understanding the Yijing lies in the comprehension of its
graphic forms and their geometrical and numerical interrelationships. The words
of the text are merely derived from these formal elements.
8) The key to understanding the Yijing lies in the comprehension of its
words, their meanings, and the social and moral principles which it describes. The
graphics are primarily a way of organizing and filing these thoughts.
2

Notes on this Translation
Speculation
With that said, this book also contains a great deal of conjecture. For more
than 2500 years the great bulk of material written in various schools of thought
on the Book of C hanges has been retroactive conjecture, offered as if known as
fact, and our modern scholarship is no exception to this. Anyone who claims to
be close to certainty in their interpretation is either deluded or else trying to fool
you. It is too late for perfect understanding - the time is long past for certainty.
And barring an archaeological miracle several orders of magnitude greater than
what the twentieth century produced, there has been far too much water gone
flowing down the Yangtze to ever get upstream and recover what went on in the
minds of the Zhouyi authors. We must live with speculation, learn to be honest
about it and work to become more effective in this uncertain state. Further, even
allowing that errors both seen and unseen have persisted for millenia, we cannot
simply toss out the received tradition or the received text and start over. But we
can at least attempt to filter out some of the various intrusions of Confucian,
Daoist and other doctrines and correct the more conspicuous and egregious
errors added to the Zhouyi in the Ten Wings and in the Apocrypha.
A number of modern western academic scholars, following the 60 year lead
of Chinese academic counterparts, have been developing and peddling a notion
that it is possible to build a solid edifice of Zhouyi interpretation without recourse
to speculation. But in fact they are speculating instead on the viability of an array
of deeply flawed methodologies. In restricting themselves with great rigor to only
the materials which they permit themselves to use, they are in effect running their
race on their certain ground fully hobbled, quite often with comical results. These
scholars call themselves "modernists" (see the Chronology at the end of History,
for names & dates). You can recognize them by their translations, which are
populated by such bizarre entities and activities as: dancing elephants, grunting
hamsters, ripping rats, bunched fat meats, feigning birds, rewarded piglets, primary
receipts, split open steppers, gullied dragons, cleaved shins, controlled keenings,
bodiless men of metal, flayed ewe kneecaps, scooped out jaws, seeking dodders,
constant catches, hopping goats, spurting livers, ungauged junctures, chopped
out loins, lost money axes and, above all, twitching and tittering captives
everywhere.  These people are sure that this is how the Early Zhou Chinese used
to think and talk. And because they are able to praise each other as experts, and
provide impressive l