transforming the confusing
experience into more useful intelligence. He keeps to the shadows awhile, looking
behind all the curtains and scenes, learning of the forces at work in the background,
while under a cover of darkness, possessing what makes the maze useful, using even
ignorance to best advantage. The dark, secret places are found. Now they shelter and
guard young plans and designs, and a newer map is drawn of a brighter tomorrow.
386

55.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.5: mature one’s tiger transformation, be sure)
The pattern emerges
Bringing reward and commendation
Promising
55.5x Six fifth holds promise:
(Of) bringing rewards
Great change is at hand. Who is who or what is what, or even what needs to be done,
resolves itself out of the fuzz like the stripes on a growing tiger. What was chaos in
gold and black becomes stark relief. The new king asks clear, candid questions, and
invites specific talents to court, and demands only relevant answers. And those fools
around the old throne will get rid of the mush in their mouths or will be replaced by
more competent men. A real command starts to delegate. Genius is task specific and
its strength is the solving of problems. Retained for more general use, it only grows
fat and lazy. When a change is resolved in the mind and clear resolutions are made,
the sovereign’s new focus is more than a match for confusion. The unclear part of
the shaman’s journey is over, mind is now unstuck. Now he assembles his insights.
55.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.6: emergencies to expedite, executions & mercy)
So rich are their dwellings
Screening away their own families
Peering through their doorways
Desolate in their want of others
Three years not seen face to face
Unfortunate
55.6x (So) rich (are) their dwellings:
(Having) soared to heaven’s threshold
* Peering through their doorways
Desolate in their want of others:
A consequence of concealment
Prosperity’s point was to get him up here and aloof, shed of the coarseness below.
He was told he would mingle with angels. Attaining his dream of abundance, he has
finally built his big, secure house way up high on the hill, with the tall wall around it,
to screen himself off with his family from suspected thieves, such as time. His food
and his fuel have to sneak in through the back door. He needs keys to get out and
shoes to come in. At first it seems he truly might be in heaven, or hovering nearby.
But three years alone start to alter his thinking. He watches his gate and notes that
it never opens. No friends int rude, no angels, not even beggars or bandits. This is
high’s down side: three years of mourning, missing the clamor and din, lost social
savvy and skills, the laughter of children. Today he considers inviting some thieves.
387

55, Dimensions  
pang tong gua (opposite): 59, Huan, Scattering 
qian gua (inverse): 56, Lu, The Wanderer 
jiao gua (reverse): 21, Shi He, Biting Through 
hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess 
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family 
 
55, Notes  
* 55.1 Xun2 was an ancient ten day week, with a cycle of specific sacrifical rituals.  
Ten days away would miss only one of each. The Chinese text does not read shi ri,   
ten days, which would suggest different symbolic connotations of the number ten. 
* 55.2 There is much speculation that references to darkness and stars at midday  
refer to a midday solar eclipse in the Early Zhou. I can neither find evidence for  
this in the Zhouyi text itself, nor rule it out as an hypothesis. This interpretation  
refers instead to a purported
 phenomenon which can also occur with an eclipse: with   
vision from deep inside of a tunnel or well, reflected and ambient light is absorbed  
and only the direct or polarized rays are admitted. Without ambient glare even the  
stars might be seen. The big price to pay for abundance is the nuisance of extreme  
distraction. Both sharp focus and executive decision making, imagined or