tence.
There are reasons to be cautious about greater breadth, though. Even with
the broader glosses generally advised, there are places where words and phrases
might be quite specific and yet vary with their application and context. A good
example of this is the much repeated Wu Jiu, which can - and should - range in
translation from 'no blame' to 'nothing wrong' to 'not bad' to 'no harm done' to
'with no mistakes.' There are also cases where the translation should remain the
same but new aspects should unfold or be seen in different circumstances. The
phrase Li She Da Chuan, "(it is) worthwhile to cross the great stream" seems to
mean something a little different in each place it is used. At Gua 05, Waiting or
Anticipation, it is rather subtly suggesting that this crossing is best done before
the rains come and so sets a good example of this chapter's subject of optimizing
the meantime. At Gua 13, Fellowship With Others, it speaks to broadening our
25

horizons and our exposure to humanity beyond our familiar spheres. At Gua 26,
Raising Great Beasts, the act is more akin to making a survey of one's domain or
an intelligence gathering activity.
The technique that I have used in working with the breadth of glosses in
general was as follows: First, I looked up each of the thousand-plus words in
twelve different Chinese-English dictionaries, beginning with those focused on
the classics (Schuessler, Karlgren, Wieger and Mathews) and proceeded forward
in time to pre-communist lexicons, scoping the range of the historically plausible
meanings on index cards. Second, I read or re-read the translations listed in the
bibliography, adding those English options to the cards which showed both
plausibility and promise. Third, I studied the cards with thesauruses in hand and
added options consistent with the dictionary research, often filling in logical gaps
between the dictionary definitions. Fourth, after two passes across the Matrix
translation, using the cards as a source and highlighting useable words, I edited
the material on the cards by roughly 50 percent. Fifth, for the Yijing’s structural,
frequently used and otherwise important words, I developed the Glossary. Sixth,
using this Glossary, I made the last pass across the Ma trix translation while trying
to exercise a minimum of the options and make as few assumptions as I could
(Occam’s razor) until the translations made sense, with a quantum of sense being
the final criterion. Finally, I selected a linear translation from among the Matrix
options to stand alone as the Linear or introductory translation. On the whole, I
found working with the dictionaries to be slightly more helpful than the presently
available English translations.
Narrow Glosses (Cultural References)
An extension of the plea for broader glosses concerns the Zhouyi's many
specific cultural references, including historical. Waley tried to lump these all
together as "omen or 'peasant interpretation' texts" but  this is
 far too simplistic.
Maybe at one level of the text the authors were providing "virtual omens," setting
the oracle up so that the getting of a textual omen would have the same force and
effect as seeing the omen in daily life. But this does not account for a high
percentage of the images. Much of the text of the Zhouyi is borrowed in small
chunks and phrases from the broader and older culture around it. Traditional
omens make up a small but significant part of this. But it also borrows lines from
songs and verses, bits of folk wisdom, ethical advice, proverbs, folklore, farming
forecasts, historical anecdotes, po litical maxims, military strategies, advice to the
lovelorn, and insights gleaned from observation of nature and her many creatures.
Scattered among these is an unknown number of historical allusions. Many of
these seem to have already become idiomatic expressions prior to their being
incorporated and we have no certain grip on their meaning (the "loss of livestock
in Yi" being a good exampl