held up, detained, deterred,
interrupted; defective
39.T, Tuan Zhuan
Impasse
(Means) problems
Risk lies ahead
To perceive the risk and be able to stop
(Is) wisdom indeed!
Impasse (is) worthwhile west (to) south:
To make progress (is) to find the center
It is not worthwhile east (to) north:
This way dead ends
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being:
Making progress will be an achievement
(In) a proper position, persistence (is) opportune:
In order to do right by the territory
Impasse’s timely application (is) very important now!
288

39.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.1: braking wheels, soaking tail, no harm done)
If going is impassable
Then coming back is respectable
39.1x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back
 (is) respectable:
(It is) reasonable to wait
Who calls it a shameful or embarrassing thing to change your mind and your plans?
The smarter one of a pair takes note of the dark clouds over the pass and elects to sit
by the bridge, cooling his tired feet and wiggling his toes in the water, attending the
rhythm of things, consolidating his progress so far. His partner presses on into the
foothills, but there finds himself surrounded on one huge side. This is not a gauntlet
or challenge: if it’s you in motion towards trouble, then where is blame to be placed?
By evening he catches up with his partner, all the way back at the bridge, having now
gone twice the distance for nothing, while his partner got so far ahead here simply
by lagging behind. If this direction leads nowhere, then why not go nowhere as well,  
saving effort? Home is where the feet are: advance for its own sake won’t get there.
39.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.2: well down low, damaged bucket, shoot fish)
The sovereign’s minister is set back and interrupted
But this is not one person’s cause
39.2x The sovereign’s minister (is) set back (and) interrupted:
In the end there is no reproach
Some of these crazy things that he does in his work for the king, had he decided to
do them himself, would make him seem pretty foolish. When the mountain’s pass
is closed, the servant goes up into the storm and tries to open it up. When the bard
tells the king of a magical stone on top of the land’s highest peak, the servant gets
orders for a mid-winter climb through the snow. The king may have no idea what
he puts this poor fellow through. At least he gets to use the king’s gear. This isn’t
a question of judgment at all, although serving a greater cause should nevertheless
still spare you for some future use, else the greater good was just bad and a waste.
With little credit for the successes and little blame for failures, he takes what he can
from the work. The king owns the mountain in theory, the servant owns it in fact.
289

39.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.3: joining with such inferior people)
If going is impassable
Then coming back means turning around
39.3x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back
(means) turning around:
(Those) within rejoice in this
Up close to the ridge he finds problems, a difficult pass and clouds getting darker.
It looks like a good adventure and he has both health and courage. But this is why
he was chosen to scout. Those who follow are not bold types, but they do have their
various merits. And so he retreats with his latest perspectives, looking less foolish
by walking back forwards, having traveled this distance twice without any progress
or blame. This was not some cosmic purpose. To act differently on new information
is not vacillation. You just turn around and go in the new kind of forward, make the
two left turns, and whatever was holding you back now helps you forward. Retreat
saves more than himself. He subordinates an objective to gain a successful outcome.
How linear it is to be stuck in just one direction: that’s a flunked intelligence test.
39.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.4: unsettled, ambivalent, going, coming, for allies)
If go