illenia past, to leap with one’s whole heart
at the first opportunity, without any pretense or pretexts. Humans began in this way.
Were it not for the animal passions, only plants would exist. Heaven and earth must
unite to bring forth the ten thousand things. But we modern people believe that we
have a lot farther to go. Now one might leap instead into webs, and nets, and other
entanglements. This can even cause some folks to think about what they are doing,
to consider the long-term priorities and defer their gratifications until the time ripens
a little. It’s bred in the bone to want and desire. It’s part of a young maiden’s nature
to hunt and try to entrap the young noble. She chases him now, thinking nubile and
noble to be a good mix, thinking charm and desire will lead him, ready to get him to
jump to some early conclusions. Yet there may be more to his life than trolling this
lake for nubile young maidens, and the awkwardness of the following days to regain
the distance he wants. For longer vision, or more distant ends, this fling might best
be begun with a clear, level talk about options. Deferring gratification isn’t forever.
377

54.M, Key Words
Premature engagement, compromising position, settling early for less, entrapment
Jumping to conclusions, immediate gratification, haste, impulsiveness, immaturity
Impatience, eagerness, quick solutions, ephemera, transience; whim, flush, rush
Fascination, allurement, unenduring enthusiasm, charm, appeal, desire as a leader
Passing fancy, short sight, seduction, bait; addiction meaning to give into slavery
Difficulties in right mating, discrimination, subordinating offer to long term goals
54.G, From the Glossary
gui1 (a, the) betrothal, engagement, homecoming, marriage, new home; return;
(to) belong, (come, go, take, turn) back; bring home (around, again), come (back)
home, restore, return, revert, bring to; send, go (back, home) (to); be persuaded,
capitulate, give in, (give) in marriage, marry, gave ... in ma rriage; become loyal,
change loyalties, submit, turn over to; go to new home (s, ed, ing); (to be) res-
tored; to where ... belongs; where to turn
mei4 (a, the) little sister, younger sister, maiden, virgin, girl, daughter of second
wife, step sister; young sister’s, little sister’s
54.T, Tuan Zhuan
Little sister’s marriage
Heaven (and) earth have their meanings in wholeness
 (When) heaven (and) earth do not interact
Then the myriad beings do not come to be
Little sister’s marriage (is) humanity’s end (and) beginning
Satisfaction (as) a way to move
(Is) the reason for little sister’s marriage
To go boldly (is) inauspicious:
The dignity is not appropriate
Not a direction with merit:
The yielding takes advantage of the firm
378

54.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.1: no blame)
Little sister marries as second wife
The lame are still able to take steps
To press on is promising
54.1x Little sister marries as second wife:
In order to endure
* The lame can (still) take steps:
Fortunate
(In) supporting each other
Little sister settles in a little bit early for something a little bit less, beginning at the
bottom and building with modest means. With her simple roof and her simpler life
and just enough wherewithal to get by, she seems content to be this far from the top.
There are many who get by with less, content with substance and content. Many too,
who must tramp along resigned to having one leg gone lame, no longer asked to run
errands, no longer envied or challenged, perhaps to never go farther than an ordinary
reality. But freedom from all these demands might set her free from the hustle, and
leave her time to be just herself, enjoying her life as it is. Her daring not to be great
does not prevent her becoming the best she can be. This is not so inferior after all:
life is many-dimensioned. And she does not purposely cripple herself to attain this.
54.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.2: countless losses, up 9 hills, chase wastes 7 days)
The on