lower or believer, this was unthink-
able, the heresy of seeing human beings and human endeavor behind a such a
wonder.
What want or purpose was in the hearts of these shammans as they sang
their visions into being? What was on the minds of these wizards as they divined
the order in these hidden connections and resonances? What was the nature of
the prescription, who was the patient in need and what was the illness when
these alchemists so carefully blended im age and number with meaning and
principle? To even begin to get a better grasp on these questions, it may be useful
to take a little speculative journey. You are not being asked to take this journey
very seriously, but it might offer an insight or two:
You have been informed that a carriage is coming to remove you and your
belongings to Hao, the new capital, two hundred li, a four-day’s journey, away.
Your cracks, for once, make n
o sense. But then, you were not trained to divine
your own future. You only knew that this looked pretty bleak until eight years
ago, when the tyrant Zhou Xin fell. Lately you have been hearing rumors about
important changes brewing in your craft. This would be the reason for your call
since divining is the talent you are known for, and you are widely known. Your
teacher’s teacher was a diviner for Di Yi. You would have at least four days away
from your work and time to reflect back and wonder what this was for.
You were only eight years old when Di Yi died, many centuries ago in your
life. Over the next ten years you would watch, in great detail, the dynamics of
your culture in a steep decline, knowing only that this somehow concerned your
still undiscovered Ming, your higher purpose and destiny, and that these complex
dynamics merited your best scrutiny. The look was always in your eyes, although
the thought was not yet behind it; there were dark times when you felt that your
503

gaze was meant only to keep you at a distance from friends and society. Your
teacher found you at last and together you became a pair of refugees, living near
small villages, growing your own food and medicine, planting some seeds where
you could. You began your apprenticeship in a thatched hut built over a pit,
where you would study the Dao of Shell and Bone and seek the elusive Ming.
But Ming would not be enough. You would need also to discover, raise and
nurture your Ling, your Spirit Power, to see into the hidden resonances, to see
and get to know Shang Di , the superior divine force at the heart of all unity and
hidden connections. And to see would mean seeing anew, through these already
too-old eyes, with Shen Ming , or Spirit Clarity. For some of the diviners, the Xi
and the Wu, the wizards and s hamans, there was another Dao, or Path, for this.
Once a month, before the moon was full, in a discipline of the spirit which you
would continue for the rest of your life, you would fast a day and then dine on
the purple-tinged wan nian zhi , the ten-thousand year mushroom, or the noble,
auspicious, miracle-working ling z hi, the mushroom of the spirits. Also, at least
once each year you would swallow all human pride and good taste, prepare and
consume the venom of the flesh-mushroom, the wan nian hama, the ten-thousand
year toad. You would set these two potent medicines to work on your thoughts
and perceptions, and on your heart, as though to cure yourself of limitation and
blindness. And how else would you be able to speak with any 
authority on so
many different states of mind? Your teacher provided the careful guidance you
would need, but would give explanations of your changes only according to this
need, when you grew ready to ask the right questions. It was you, as it must be,
who did the hard work of personal evolution.
Among your first discoveries was that Time was a true dimension. It was not
a moment tracking on a line in a spatial metaphor between past and future. It was
deeper and wider than a line, like a mountain is to a string; it had a dimensional
sp