ion of the “received text” of the Yijing, from the Chinese Imperial Edition of
1715, the Zhouyi Zhezhong , substantially as found in the Harvard-Yenching
Institute's Zhouyi Yinde (1935) and in Z.D. Sung’s The Text of the Yi King (1935).
All of the minor corrections made to these versions (primarily subtle changes in
parsing) are discussed at the end of the Matrix translation, where the full Chinese
text is given.
This simple version should be considered no more than a sample translation,
derived from the multi-dimensional Matrix translation. There exists no single string
of English words able to convey the breadth and play of thought and meaning in the
Chinese original. English tends to be too specific in its focus and definition to do
this, while the Chinese text plays much with multiple levels and meanings. The
Matrix format has the ability to capture some of these other layers of meaning.
Because of these multiple layers, it would be pretentious to call any literal and/or
straightforward translation “definitive.”
This introductory version had four objectives:
1) To represent each Chinese term with an English counterpart (sometimes
this was only a punctuation mark) so that no part of the original idea was left out of
the text. In a few cases, a single English word carried the meaning of two or three
Chinese words (e.g. pin m a zhi = mare’s). More often, it would take two or more
English words to render a Chinese character. An insistence on this word-for-word
discipline prevented me from ignoring all of the little words and particles when they
seemed unimportant or inconvenient, as most translators, including the modernists
and other scholars, have consistently done. And, with a book this short and succinct,
I think it proved a useful suspicion t hat all of these characters had contributions
to make to the meanings of the texts.
2) To add as few words as possible, without embellishment. Much of the
meaning of the Chinese text is merely implied b
y the position of the words within a
phrase, and often this implication will include the part of speech, as well as tense,
gender, plurality, voice and mood. Possessives and conjunctions are often implied.
I often had need to make these implications explicit by adding words sparingly in
parentheses. Sometimes a word in parenthesis is added to bring out the humor (or
other nuance) seemingly intended in the original text, but almost always missed by
translators. Finally, many of the English expressions were allowed to stand as mere
sentence fragments, as soon as they could stand alone. No apology is made for this.
Too much has been added in translations only to satisfy English grammatical rules.
3) To preserve the original word order, wherever this could be rendered in a
way which made sense. This was not always possible, or always desirable. Chinese
prepositions usually follow their objects; where they do, except in a few cases, this
required a switch. Words like ru and ruo were also difficult to keep in order. Such
switches of word order are indicated only in the Matrix translation, by up and down
symbols ^ v.
52

4) To avoid the arbitrary assignment of gender to Chinese pronouns. When
taken as singular, for example, the pronoun qi2 can be translated as he, him, his, she,
her or hers. There are many other options here as well, including the plural forms of
they, them or their. In places, I think I just needed to prove the point that this could
be done. Sometimes this led to a more awkward construction than I would have
liked, and sometimes I reached further and rendered qi2 as that or those. At any rate,
this was successful, but at some cost to other literary values. I did not even attempt,
however, to carry this determination into the commentary.
It might strike some readers as odd that I chose to place the Da Xiang or the
Overall Image before the Tuan or Judgment. The Da Xiang is from the Ten Wings
while the Tuan belongs to the original Zhouyi. I did this only because it provides a