inning with the two. He paused long enough to be certain
of the group’s comprehension. Next came the four, which were placed in the Si
Fang, and the Shi Fang , the four directions and the seasons’ directions. He then
paused again while you pondered. You knew in part by his silence that he knew
your collective abilities. Instead of being impatient, you all looked long at the
obvious, which you all knew was the first place to look for the overlooked truth.
Next, he laid out the eight, both in a circle and in a line. When you had studied
these for an hour, he began to point to the figures in the two sets of pairs: first to
the opposite pairs, and then to the two pairs of inverts. You studied these eight
until evening, neither venturing nor wanting to speak. The Duke at last rose to
507

take his leave. He said that this was the just the first step and the next would be
taken tomorrow. He would be back for the morning meal.
You knew that there was more than eight. In fact, you knew that there were
twenty-four. For centuries, you craft had had eight for a compass, and sixteen
basic forms of the cracks: brace, corner, fork, bow, etc. It was merely that t hese
eight three-line figures simply bore no relation to your traditional notations. You
all saw the next step coming, and nobody was surprised when the Duke laid out
the eight in two lines, one vertical and one horizontal. The Duke explained that
what you saw yesterday his father had seen in his first year in prison. Today you
would see what he saw in his second year. He then began to configure the sixty-
four by column and row, and requested that when you began to see the pattern,
that you begin to help to lay it out. By the time all 576 stalks were in place, you
were taking turns assisting, and then taking time to step back and be astonished
at the possibilities. This new pattern could swallow you craft whole and still be
hungry. For the rest of the day you gaped and made the various noises that
insight makes. Those of you with beards tugged thoughtfully and often.
You spent the third day naming and listing associations for the two, not with
one name but with dozens. On the fourth and fifth days you named the four. The
eight took more than a week. Among the first sets of associations were those of
nature’s most illustrative phenomena, examples of nature’s behavior, the family
relationships, the eight directions and phases of the seasons, although this last set
bore only a slight relationship to the new calendar system. Of course this early in
the process none of these would stay still. It was not unlike engraving images in
sand and water. By what then seemed like a natural consensus, it was decided
that the sixty-four must also be studied as pairs of the eight
, as one stood below
and one above, as one was within and the other without. And since your group
and its craft was so deeply concerned with the nature of Time and its inclinations,
these diagrams would also portray progressions or changes, processes instead of
states, such as stages of life or growth in conformity with the time. Only a few of
the diagrams bore a resemblance to something familiar, so the other perspectives
would be necessary. Sometimes you were able to derive a few more meanings by
pairing and then contrasting diagrams which had certain structural relationships:
in some pairs all six lines were different, in some pairs the three-line figures were
reversed, and in other pairs the counterpart was the diagram turned upside down.
You also had a great deal of help from a member who was no longer present. Ji
Chang, now called Wen W ang, the Duke’s father, had already ventured into this
exercise two decades before, scratching notes for some of the diagrams on pieces
of bamboo. The Duke commissioned the production of a set of large jars, which
were engraved with the symbols and placed in the house so that, as ideas were
agreed upon, notes could be placed in them. These notes might contain anything
which could be wr