o not question this at all
* Kindness (is) our worth:
A well-earned objective
One’s hunger for reassurance might only complicate things. If you want to know
whether or not you tread the proper path, try asking yourself when your mind isn’t
listening in. Especially when your luck has turned to good. Do you really deserve
to seize this day or this fortune? Who are you to judge your own worth or merit?
If rewards are offered, collect them. And then, if they do not belong in your hands,
just spread that good stuff around. Sometimes to take the thing well is the best gift
to give to its giver, for those who must quantify gratitude. But to seek answers and
confirmation returns us to doubt and self-conscious discomfort. The generous heart
is in the right place and the purpose is already gained. Defining the gifts will only
contain them and take them from circulation. The pipe carries more than the bucket.
42.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.6: four horses, tears of blood flowing like water)
Nobody increases this one
Somebody assaults this one
Adopting an inconstant heart
Disappointing
42.6x Nobody increases this one:
One-sided expression
* Somebody assaults this one:
(This) comes from beyond
Not only does his one-sided taking bring no increase to him or to those around him,
many will take great delight in crossing a distance through hardship, for the pleasure
of punishing him. And even this far out of their way they might call it self-defense.
It may be a kind of increase to have such a strange and intense popularity. It may be
a kind of gain to attract some attention this way. It might be a kind of a power to put
distant folks into such a bad mood. His reputation precedes him. This is the sort of
person who, when seeing error, adopts it, because it can add to his size. This is not
profit, only gross income - the bottom line is the net, but less all the damages done.
This sort of thing gives a bad reputation to selfishness. But in fact, if done correctly,
a more prosperous self will be a more generous self, and yet it won’t be diminished.
309

42, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 32, Heng, Continuity
qian gua (inverse): 41, Decreasing
jiao gua (reverse): 32, Heng, Continuity
hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
42, Notes
* 42.2 Di could refer either to divine forces and powers, or to the lineage of wor-
thy emperors as ancestors, especially Di Yi (r. 1096-1059) who may have been a
part of the Zhou line of descen t. In either case, even the sovereign answers to a
higher power and is humble and respectful before this. An authentic gratitude is
an important part of taking increase, gifts, grants or benefits well.
42, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yetzirah of Atziluth
* Tarot: Prince of Wands
* Astrology: Leo Ascending, Fixed Fire
42, Quotations
* Give me a lever and one firm spot on which to stand and I will move the earth.
—Archimedes
* Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day.
Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime. —Chinese proverb
* The art of acceptance is the art of making someone who has done you a small
favor wish that he might have done you a greater one. —Russell Lynes
* And I asked myself about the present. How wide it was, how deep it was.
And how much was mine to keep. —Kurt Vonnegut, Slaughterhouse Five
* A man who is so dull that he can only learn by personal experience
is too dull to learn anything important by experience. —Don Marquis
* Not what we say about our blessings, but how we use them, is the true measure
of our thanksgiving. —W. T. I. Purkister
* If you limit your choices only to what seems possible or reasonable, you
disconnect yourself from what you truly want, and all that is left is a compromise.
—Robert Fritz
* The man who doesn't read good books has no advantage over the man who can't
read them. —Mark Twain
310

GUA 43, GUAI4, DECISIVENESS
 
  Binary 111 110 = 62; Qian below, Dui above
43.X, Overall Image
The lake rises into the sky