oof comes
crashing down. But isn’t it odd that the mats are made out of roof thatch? Maybe he
prays for less interesting times than those that Greatness in Excess promise to give.
Maybe he feels lowly and weak because life has not been as easy or kind. But under
this roof is no place to hide: one wants a heads-up caution here, not the fussy kind.
28.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.2: persuaded in one's legs, to abide is timely)
The withered poplar sprouts a new shoot
An older gentleman finds himself a maiden to marry
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
28.2x (An) older gentleman (and) maiden companion:
Going beyond with each other’s support
Wonders will cease, but not just yet. His springtime might have been a bit springier,
but this thought is not slowing him down. Perhaps he is even stepping more lively
now that the end is in sight and he runs out of time. The old prune is a plum again,
the old dog has picked up a new trick. And, if our young lady can bring our old goat
back to life, there may yet be some children or heirs. In times such as these, the real
priorities show, the kind which reach far past our wisdoms. Even now, life is tough
stuff to stop. Now, who would have thought that these sublime stirrings were some
kind of force majeure? We should not be quick to judge Eros a light and frivolous
force. This kind of force insists in the subtlest ways, but it authors the species and
drives our evolution by wanting what it wants. These waters run deep in our beings.
223

28.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.3: oppressed by stone, grab thorns, do not see wife)
The ridgepole is deformed
Ominous
28.3x The ridgepole’s deformity becomes trouble:
It is not enough to assume support
He kept trying to get his friends to call him an architect, but they only wanted to use
the word “poet.” Living and then later learning is one way to move through life, but
one picks up a lot to be later unlearned. Living to learn is another: for folks living
thus, even the stones are good teachers. Living alone in one’s mind is a third way to
live, and for these, misfortune is often the way fortune works. It is now time to pay
the tuition for a crash course in applied engineering: deflection, bending and failure
in simple beams under live loads in worst-case scenarios. The pressure grows nearly
unbearable. The stress and strain is more urgent than an omen and more signal than
a sign. Failure is not a slow motion process. The acceleration of gravity is constant,
so our poet’s acceleration may be the only variable. Move to higher ground, quickly.
28.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.4: the well is being relined, nothing is wrong)
The ridgepole holds up
Promising
To take much more, then deficiency
28.4x The ridgepole’s holding up holds promise:
Not a failing onto those below
Though it sags when the sky grows too heavy, the beam gives fair warning this time.
It seems bent enough to warrant assessment. A provisional brace or repair might, or
might not, permit a rest or long absence. Some stresses accumulate, some go away,
but both of these happen in time, and time plays the odds, and odds mean margins
of safety. Failure and bending are two different states: failure will happen just once,
but bending in stress is the best time to study a structure. When one part reveals a
weakness, remember you work with a system, not just a pile of boards: the trouble
could be in the groundwork. If the margin of safety is set at the norm, then normally
the roof will not fall in and kill you. You will want this to not happen more than half
of the time. You only want to be killed by extraordinary events, so measure this well.
224

28.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao* 32.5: continuing in character, her promise, his problem)
The withered poplar* bears flowers
An older lady finds herself a young gentleman to marry
No blame, no praise
28.5x The withered poplar bears flowers:
(But) how could this last?
* (An) olde