e envelopes of
meaning for these words will be stretched a little, and the dictionary might one
day add this to the definition. But how can you tell which glosses specifically
occurred to the authors? I am afraid this lies outside of the modernist toolbox - by
studying how the idea as translated hangs together and makes sense as an idea. 
There exists in linguistics an hypothesis called Linguistic Relativity, a.k.a.
the Sapir-Whorf-Korzybski Hypothesis (running counter in many ways to that of
Chomsky, et al, which tends to think of language as hard-wired and universal).
This postulates a reciprocal relationship between language structures (phonetics,
morphemics, vocabulary, syntax and grammar) and the kind of experiential world
which the speaker of that language inhabits. This might suggest that a person
using a language with no nouns (these exist) would tend to live and think in a
more lively world of verbs or processes. It also suggests that the prior existence of
a name for an experience makes it easier for one to discover or recreate that
experience. But the key word here is “easier,” which is used in the place of
“possible.” Certainly not all perception is founded on language. The authors of
the Yi observed many things which would have to wait thousands of years for a
name. For example, they had no word for latent heat in change-of-state physics,
yet they clearly observed it at Gua 40 and at Gua 59. Sim ilarly, Lucretius wrote
about the properties o
f atoms and molecules and about the process of natural
selection nearly two millenia before Lavoisier and Darwin. There is a difference
between anachronism and having vision. My rule of thumb in these translations
has been to give credit for an observation where due, but still within my best
guess at the ancient vocabulary and level of technology. I have tried to avoid
underestimating the authors, as I think the scholars have done.
Overestimating the authors' intellectual and cultural development is yet
another matter. This the modernists have certainly not done. Unquestioning
believers have, and yet many of the ideas which they have retroactively credited
to the authors, especially the metaphysical and ideological ones, do not show the
depth of understanding inherent in the authors' simple use of concrete metaphor
and analogy. The authors were able to convey some very insightful ideas with
simple, unsophisticated images and terms. The meaning of characters may have a
general tendency to evolve from the concrete to the abstract, with the exception
of nouns naming tangible things, but this is not always progress. For example, the
Zhouyi uses the term Dao, way, road or path, as a simple, concrete metaphor for a
being's journey through life, the journey which is actually taken, as distinct from
the broader field of possibilities. The modernists would not give them this much
credit - this would have 
to be an actual r oad, along which you dragged your
twitching captives, or where you might see hopping goats. But there are those of
us who would call this a truly great little basic metaphor, and would claim that a
20

lot of later Daoists would have been a lot better off if they would have left it as
such instead of turning it into some nebulous cosmic field of pure possibility
where it loses all of its power to instruct. The "concept" of Dao became less
understood when it came to be seen as more than the road or path as metaphor.
Waley asserts (p 125) that "moral meanings, such as upright, just, sincere,
etc., come late into a language," and uses this claim as a call to divest the Zhouyi
of moral and ethical instructive content, dragging the whole subject back in time
to the question of obedience versus punishment. I am not prepared to join Waley
in the claim that the Early Zhou was too soon for ethical ideas, particularly if the
Zhouyi was even in the least part intended to have anything to do with the
education and training of young nobility. Even the broader culture, not just th