inclined to give this much
weight as a candidate for the original sequence either. The text of Laozi' Daodejing  was
found re arranged in this package as well. Rather, this appears to be one of the several
unique Guwen texts which made their appearance after the Qin book burnings, at a time
when the fear for the loss of one’s contributions came to be common among scholars. But
neither do I suspect this of being one of the deliberate forgeries from this era. It might
simply have been one scholar’s creative interpretation and legacy.
14

The original order may have been geometrical. It almost certainly would have been if
the Ba Gua preceded the conception of the Gua (for which there is no evidence). But even
here it is not likely that the Ba Gua would be sequenced as binary numbers. A Tr igram
sequence might have followed any one of a number of lineal arrangements based upon
associations with the family, such as Jing Fang’s (77-37) Dui, Li, Xun, Kun  (Youngest,
Middle, Eldest Daughter & Mother); Gen, Kan, Zhen, Qian (as above, for the boys). There
do exist good hints in the Zhouyi that Zhen was already thought of as the eldest son and
Dui the youngest daughter.
The true and final chapter sequence is not known to history prior to Shao Yong (1011-
1077) of the Song. True and final are not in quotes: this is the proper sequence, regardless
of the history. Known as the Xian Tian (Primal Heaven) Xu, this is the sequence of the
sixty four Gua as the six-digit binary numbers from decimal 00 thru 63. Not many English
commentators have numbered these correctly, exceptions being Needham, Kaser, Secter and
Hacker. No table is needed to look up these numbers: they are numbers. Yin is a zero in
any position, Yang is a 32, 16, 08, 04, 02, or 01, depending on whether it occurs in the 1st
through Top positions, respectively. But one aspect of this sequence is poorly understood
even today: it is much more useful to the understanding if it is read in both directions. Read
“forwards” the sequence tells the story of the accumulation of the Yang force in
increasingly fundamental positions. One might call this the launching of the dragon, the
Vama Marg, the Left Hand Path or the way of the sorcerer. When it is read “backwards”
the story is then about the accumulation of the Yin's forceless adaptability in increasingly
fundamental positions. This could be called the slaying of the dragon, the Dakshina Marg
the Right Hand Path or the way of the mystic. Carlos Castaneda’s Don Juan calls this
“losing self-importance.” But above all it should be understood that, all appearances to the
contrary, these are not mutually exclusive paths but a paradox of wisdom.
While the Xian Tian, taken in two directions, is the perfect sequence of the Gua, it is
not the final or most useful arrangement: this is a geometry, based upon this sequence,
called the Xian Tian Ba Gong, the Eight Houses of the Primal Heaven (See Figure 1 &
more on this at Ban Xiang).  On this grid every single structural dimension of the Yijing
plots out with mathematical symmetry, as is partially demonstrated in the Figures. For
example, the Middle Path, the Gua with a balance of Yang and Yin (the Wing dimension of
Fen) lights up on this grid (See Fig. 28). This is the path from Separating to Interplay
which integrates the sorcerer(ss) and the mystic [it even holds a mystery, for the student’s
further puzzlement, at Xun and Zhen, the finesse-and-force dichotomy, the De]. It also lights
up the Yi
’s other fractional sequences, such as sevenths and ninths (Figs. 25 & 26). The
term Ba Gong  (Eight Houses) is also used in a broader sense to refer to a number of
alternative eight-by-eight grids, especially those developed in the Yiweishu speculations. The
original Zhouyi arrangement might have been a Ba Gong  grid in this broader sense. This
certainly would have made the conception of the whole a simpler task for the authors. But if
this was so this pattern was lost long ago.
15

The Qian Gua or Invers