h wang3 here: it means nets, webs, snares,
traps, etc., and also wits, subtlety, trickery.
34, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Malkuth in Assiah
* Tarot: Ten of Wands
* Astrology: Pluto in Fire
34, Quotations
* Power is not revealed by striking hard and often, but by striking true. —Balzac
* All power is of one kind, a sharing of the nature of the world. The mind that is
parallel with the laws of nature will be in the current of events, and strong with
their strength. —Emerson
* There is no need to fear the strong. All one needs to know is the method of
overcoming them. There is a special jujitsu for every strong man.
—Yevgeny Yevtushenko
* The hallucination of power corrupts as efficiently as power. —Leonard Wolf
* Power, n., The ability or capacity to perform or act effectively ... the rate at
which work is done. —American Heritage Dictionary
* Flexibility is the most requisite qualification for the management of great
affairs. —Jean Francois de Retz
* Power resides in the moment of transition from the past to a new state.
—Emerson
262

GUA 35, JIN4, EXPANSION
 
  Binary 000 101 = 05; Kun below, Li above
35.X, Overall Image
The light rises over the earth
Expansion
The noble young one, therefore,
naturally radiates clarity of character
The cold but patient earth turns to greet another new day, and welcomes powerful
stimulus from its warm and generous star. Light becomes heat and heat becomes
activity. The markets and roads come alive. More than light is dawning here. This
energy coming into the system not only powers the system: it will organize it too,
in the same way that good health will clarify the mind. When energy can circulate
freely it tends to articulate a natural order. When human behavior circulates freely
it will tend to articulate a natural ethic. When resources and capital circulate freely
things may appear like the work of invisible hands.* Light is free and pure income.
35.0, Expansion
The prosperous lord* uses grants of horses
to breed a multitude
And by the light of a day three times grants audience
The long shadows withdraw, doubts go into hiding. All else has ventured out into
the light, already knowing where best to go and what best to do. Economies thaw
and the trade is set free. Stagnation burns off in the flames of new wealth. Wealth
is now seen as the rate at which the fortunate can give themselves away. Now that
which goes around circulates many times over, and all of it comes back multiplied.
It’s a struggle now to find many losers. The people, now rallied to working together,
find that their net is more than their sum. The character of the beings is also a flame.
As it is fed and it prospers, the basic needs are met in due order and life is set free
to move on to its higher purposes. The prince appears to be generous, giving freely
of his wealth to stimulate the new growth, freely of his time to hear some new ideas.
And yet his actions still spring from enlightened self-interest. His generosity pays.
The culture will grow and evolve as long as the minds which create it stay open and
free of censors and meddlers, as long as liberty teaches the ethics. Civilizations enter
dark ages when the free flow of information has ceased. Light is the great antiseptic.
263

35.M, Key Words
To advance, progress, develop, improve, grow, circulate, open, warm, thaw, dawn
Acknowledge, demonstrate; energize; emergence, discovery, disclosure, exposure
Enterprise, venture, free markets; learning by way of freedom, liberty, permission
Overt, sunny, healthy, vibrant, generous, outgoing; daylight, daytime, sunshine
Openness, assent, acknowledgment, opening up, glasnost; present, offer, promote
Character, virtu, self-development; growth too temporary, healthy to be parasitic
35.G, From the Glossary
jin4 (to) advance, progress, grow, develop, extend, prosper, increase, improve,
enter (upon), make progress, lead, introduce, present, insert (s, ed, ing); (to be)
forward, advanced, far along; (a, the) growth, advancement, progression, pr