me
from the Chun Qiu  Annals. In this era we see the Zhouyi in use as a diviner’s
handbook, primarily through the  Zuozhuan, the fourth-century BCE chronicles of
the historian Zuo Qiuming. Although this was written centuries later than its
subject period, it is generally considered to be reliable and to be based on official
records. This contains sixteen references to bu shi, or divination with the Zhouyi
using milfoil or yarrow stalks. These references begin in 672, and several points
are worthy of note here:
494

The text in this exterior reference is substantially the same as the Zhouyi text
which has come down to us. There is some elaboration, but this seems ascribable
to the diviners using the Yi, or to the process of interpretation itself. However, the
similarities between the two texts do not necessarily prove anything about the
historical reliability of the modern Zhouyi: Zuo’s quotations may have had some
role in stabilizing these particular portions of the text. It is still possible that the
Zhouyi was continuing to change and evolve throughout this era.
The Gua are by this time being interpreted in terms of their two constituent
Ba Gua or Trigrams. This is the first historical mention of the Ba Gua and this has
led to much speculation that the Ba Gua did not even exist until this period. The
modernists even state this as though it were certain. But this is more Bifurcation
(Black and White) fallacy and the issue really needs to be held open for a while
longer. There is no reason to assume that the Ba Gua had to emerge fully formed
and fully understood in order for them to play a role in the Zhouyi's  development.
There exists a whole range of gray area possibilities. A three line pattern which
repeats itself occurs in eight of the Hexagrams, the Chong (or Repeated) Gua. If
we assume that the Gua were already represented graphically, this-and-this-again
would be very hard not to notice. I have already mentioned the abundance of
Chinese reiteratives occurring in the Chong Gua at a greater statistical frequency
than elsewhere, together with the occurrence of words meaning repetition and
continuity. The consistent applicability of the Wings' Da Xiang  commentary,
which uses the Ba Gua to shed light on the 
Gua, is another argument for the
presence of some kind of elementary thinking in the development of the Gua, or a
suggestion of their co-evolution. It may be that the Ba Gua were only noticed for
a very short time in the evolution of the text, time enough to leave traces, and
then forgotten. Even if the Hexagrams were not derived from the doubling of
Trigrams, this does not mean that T rigrams were never noticed in the Hexagrams,
or that this noticing had no consequences in the writing of the appended texts.
Certainly the function of T rigrams as an interpretive method has grown much
over the years, as evidenced first in the Zuozhuan, and this led to their eventual
codification in the Shuo Gua  and their masterful interpretation in the Da Xiang .
Finally, the authors as diviners would have been well aware of the existence of a
Scale of Eight and its importance in both divination and in finding one's way
through a city. Cracks in Shell and Bone do not simply move up and down, right
and le ft: they move in compound directions more easily understood with the
intermediates to the cardinal points. The four directions will not by themselves get
you home. The role of the T rigrams within the Hexagrams is discussed further in
Dimensions, under Ban Xiang, the Half-Images.
By the time of the Zuozhuan references the Yi had already begun its long
journey towards popularity from the inner circles of the royal court. Perhaps a
shortage of tortoises or freshwater turtles had 
led to an increased usage of the
readily available yarrow stalks, thus making the oracle more accessible to the less
economically endowed. There may have been a need for an oracle which was
better adapted to answering more of the routine questions of human exis