light a little. But purely relative truth
will not work. It ends in codependence. Then one can be neither enemy nor a friend
and nobody’s message makes any pure sense. We’ll end in a hall of mirrors, facing
our own scattered lights. Some central truth must be presumed, even if it’s a fiction.
61.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.4: treading on tiger’s tail, pleading and pleading)
As the moon approaches full
The team horse runs away
But nothing is wrong
61.4x The team horse runs away:
Leaving (its) kind to rise up
The moon is waxing gibbous, reaching for fullness, and the tensions build towards
a high point. A need for fulfillment reaches a climax. As if in answer, the team horse
breaks from his harness and bolts from his servitude. Masterless, proud and fast,
he cannot now be more or less than the beast he was born to be, now living out his
own central truth, not looking around for consensus to those who shared his yoke.
Nor can he look for his nature in tasks attached to his nature by others, alien jobs
like pulling that fool’s heavy wagon around. Most humans excepted, we’ll count on
things to be simply themselves, to see by their own lights. If there is any wrong here
it is in the driver’s ideas of what the horse ought to be. These veneers of civilization
and culture are peripheral truths to natural law and the being’s original sovereignty.
422

61.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.5: granted ten pair shells, no refusing opportunity)
Being true is as good as a bond
Make no mistakes
61.5x Being true is as good as a bond:
The position (is) true (and) appropriate
To seek an extensive self-knowledge, yet still remain human enough to get by and
relate to the others, we have to find a common ground on which to build our trust.
To this end we make rules and laws, and the standards and forms of social behavior,
which often weigh more than they’re worth. Is there not a better way? We humans
can sometimes see higher truths, and we will sometimes trust those who share them.
Yet it might be thought to be the lower truths which connect us, the natural laws and
original natures we share. These are the ties that bind us most firmly. Would that we
developed an ethic which asked us to stay true to these! We can count on the fishes
and pigs to be only themselves. Being true is not to be told what the truth is: it is to
learn who we are and then stay true to our nature. This is who honors our contracts.
61.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.6: bitter limitations, persistence is unfortunate)
The rooster’s pronouncements rise into the sky
Persistence has pitfalls
61.6x The rooster’s pronouncements rise into the sky:
How could this be continued?
The clear crow of the cock attempts to pierce heaven itself. It falls somewhat shy of
this goal but it still carries messages well. The rooster cannot fly up to heaven,  so he
counts on his self-expression to argue his case up there. The neighbors, of course,
are thinking of outrageous fortune in terms of slings and arrows. One cannot expect
much more from a bird with so little brain. And his call, after all, will still bring him
ample rewards from the hens. This is what his nature allows him. This works as well
for people, for the cocksure, blowhard, rooster-brained oratory that has humankind
for its source, and for the hens who come closer to cackle about it. We go so far out
of our natural way when we take these behaviors this far. Our universe of discourse
reaches for roots in the sky, for outer or alien truths, as roosters making the sun rise.
423

61, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 62, Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
qian gua (inverse): 61, Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
jiao gua (reverse): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
61, Notes
* 61.0 Many interpretations of this phrase are based on unquestioned assumptions
by some commentators that both pigs and fishes are stupid.