g these diagrams and texts, patterns and thoughts, (is) more than halfway
done. Line two (is) related to line four, similar in merit but different in position; their skills
are not the same. Line two is frequently praised; line four is frequently cautioned - for
immediacy. (As) the flexible comes to managing the way, it is not advantageous to be distant
in this: one’s necessity is not to make mistakes; one’s aptitude (is) flexibility in the center.
Line three is related to line five, similar in merit but different in position; li ne three is
frequently adverse; line five is frequently effective. The honored and the mean are as ranks.
One’s flexibility is perilous, one’s firmness overcomes the perverse.
The Yiweishu analysts began to add the dimensions of Ban Xiang, the Half-Images
discussed above, together with the Yao D
e, the Wing and Yiweishu Line Characteristics,
discussed below, to compose the bulk of the Line interpretation system we have today.
Iulian Shchutskii’s editors, at p. xxxii, offer Shchutskii’s concise summary of this system:
25

... the texts to individual lines narrate the sequence of the situation’s development.
The first position characterizes only the very beginning of the given process, when it still
has not appeared with all its typicality. The second position characterizes the apogee of the
internal development of a given situation, just as the fifth position is the maximum exposure
of it on the outside. The third position characterizes the moment of crisis, the transition from
internal to external.
... The fourth position characterized the beginning of the appearance of the given
situation in the outside. Thus it is as l ittle typical as the first. However, it is favorably
influenced by the proximity of the fifth position. Thus the aphorisms to the fourth are not as
gloomy as the preceding. The fifth position has already been mentioned in connection with
the second position. The sixth position is the completion or over development of the process
of the given situation, in which it either loses its typicality or turns into its opposite.
This view incorporates the assumption of Ban Xiang, which to many scholars is still
open to dispute as a Zhouyi dimension, and it relies heavily upon the Wing's Yao De
dimension of Ying, the Resonance between the corresponding lines in Upper and Lower
Trigrams (1-4, 2-5 & 3-6), which is not a Zhouyi dimension.
Each of the Six Line Places is featured four times in the Zhouyi text by virtue of its
uniqueness in comparison to the remaining five. In the first two Hexagrams, Qian and Kun,
the Yao Ci carry implications of these Line meanings. These are the first twelve clues. The
second twelve are in the Zhi Gua and Fan Yao of these Lines. For example, in Fu, 24.1, the
Fan Yao of Kun, 02.1, Line One is the only Gang Line in the company of five Rou Lines.
The meaning of the Line One Position is thus highlighted here (see Fig. 12 for all twelve
examples).
The relative optimism of the Yao Ci texts, when viewed a
s prognostications, bears at
least some witness to a notion of inherent Line propitiousness in the Zhouyi thought
process. A statistical analysis will show, for instance, that Ji, Promising, occurs much more
frequently in Lines 5 and 2 and the least frequently in Line 3. Xiong, Unfortunate, occurs
most often in Lines 6 and 3 and is rarest in Lines 5 and 4. This supports the claim in
XCII.9, translated above. However, it should be remembered that every Yao Ci text may be
seen as offering a choice between two attitudes, whether the second one is stated explicitly
or merely implied. Thus, the poor subject in Line 3 might be in a complex or difficult
Position, one which perhaps demands clear and quick thinking, but this is in the nature of
the Position its elf, one which demands sterner, more urgent advice, rather than simple
predictions of doom. It is claimed frequently in the Wings, especially in the Xiao Xiang, that
propitiousness is due to other Yao De  (Line Character)