he makes. The air and the aura around
this noble young one begins to crackle with essence and power. The young dragon
teases the web of the scheme of all things, testing the intricate fabric of space time,
in search of the greater ripples and warps, in search of optimum points of departure.
Persevering was so very easy in theory, but much work has come before great work.
There will be a test, where a valiant attempt at an ignorant flight might be fatal.
01.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.4: be true, the bleeding stops, anxiety leaves)
Somehow to dance across the deep*
With no mistakes
01.4x Somehow to dance across the deep:
To make progress is not a mistake
The shaman drinks his brew, spreads his feathers, steps to the edge of the known,
to dance into higher realms. The brave young dragon stands at the edge of the cliff,
facing this rite of passage one way, his white-knuckled talons scarring the rocks,
preparing to leap from aerial theory to practice, now two different things at long last.
To gain the abyss will mean to let go of that clawhold completely. The wind will be
no easy thing to take hold of, until reaching dangerous speeds. But here is the only
control to be gained, the wind becomes the master: the only conquest comes from
obeying the facts. No wavering will lift this beast, much less beast and his baggage,
so lightening up should help. And never miss half the point by failing to look down.
There can be no half measures here, in fact, as there are no real dragons in theory.
60

01.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.5: truths like commerce; with dignity, promising)
Dragon in flight across the sky
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
01.5x Dragon in flight across the sky:
The mature human being creates
Heads turn as one to the sky, as the hopes of the masses below are carried up high
by potential fully expressed. A wide recognition inspires the young ones to follow,
if example were the point of it all. Yes indeed, from above they all look like bugs,
and like bugs they may think this sky has been conquered. But above and beyond
all of this is only the wind in your ears, screaming, then singing, then silent. Beyond
gravity, in the cold and crystalline sky, we have met the darkness between the lights,
the deep night no dragons will conquer, the humility only the great ones can grasp.
What do you re ally command from up here? Only your own, a view, an attitude,
whatever you need to accept all the rest. And little else, but that can be so much.
Lesson and example are one: high up is halfway home. Triumph is in the landing.
01.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 43: Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.6: no cry for help, the outcome will be misfortune)
Arrogant dragon will have regrets
01.6x Arrogant dragon will have regrets:
Excessiveness is not suited to longevity
He is proud to be a dragon and he has every right to be so. He takes life beyond.
Selfishness, pride and ambition, maligned though they may be, are not flaws or sins.
Doing them badly is wrong, or stupid at least, and from this they get a bad name.
And when pride starts to worship the self, that which is other more readily kills.
Turning success into failure is just not fitness. Superior beings have further to fall.
The dark, vast night has two moral lessons for us: to think about how large we are,
and to love what we can while we can. The eons of a dragon’s span are not eternity.
The little hops between the stars are not infinities. The earth, even in hand, is only
a lucky, wet rock, among many. A master of existence knows nothing of Nothing.
Life’s true home is humility: it does not belong in this sky until it can laugh at itself.
61

01.7, Using 9
Observe a group of dragons - without a leader
Promising
01.7x Using Nines:
Heaven’s nature is not about playing the leader
Playing, adopting and following leaders are games played first by young children,
and by the time they are grown, they play them so badly they injure themselves.
Be