ng your children.
The family goes way  back. If you are in the right place then right things will come.
But do not ask the water to climb. Why are you not where you say that you wanted
to be? Ask first if you are fit to this place. Is this the right place at all? So what is it
holding you back? Reassess yourself and start over. If you find you must belong,
it is easier to remake yourself than something larger than you. The late seek effects
and not causes, or they have too little in common with what they would belong to.
101

08.M, Key Words
Affiliation, association, alliance, confluence, congress, concourse, convergence,
Assimilation, coherence, cohesion, concord, commonality; bonding, joining, unity
Affinity, accord, mutuality, merging, sharing, union, nearness, welcome, kinship
Similarity, relatedness; to be drawn together; group by t ype and family, compare
Identification with; organic leadership, forces of attraction; kind-ness, like-ness
Common ground, origin, interest or cause; mitakuye oyasin (all of my relations)
08.G, From the Glossary
bi3 (to) accord, belong, combine, go together, join, affiliate, unite, associate (to,
with); sort, compare, match, assemble, join, follow, (put, hold) together, draw an
analogy (s, ed, ing); (to be) affiliated, paired (with), concordant, well-disposed;
close, familiar; successive, comparable, analogous, similar; on behalf of; (a, the)
union, belonging, affiliation, association, togetherness, congestion, commonality
08.T, Tuan Zhuan
Belonging
 (Means) promise
Belonging
(Means) confirmation
The humble respond (and) follow
(For) a first consultation, supreme and enduring commitment
(And) not a mistake:
Due to firmness in the center
Wanting peace, approach directly:
Above (and) below (are) resonant
The late are the unfortunate ones:
This path runs out
102

08.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.1: cliffs all around, resolve, establish delegates)
Be true in joining with them
Make no mistake:
Being true more than fills this plain clay vessel
The end will come to hold even more promise
08.1x Joining with them (at) first six
Holds even more promise
The lowliest and emptiest things will be the first to fill up, but this is not the same
as the most abased or the neediest things. A valley will fill first with water, then life.
Water does not struggle up hills. It proceeds by feeling its way, not with visions of
some distant sea, not by longing for ocean. There are places for struggle, vision and
longing, just not here and now. Being true and sincere already exceeds this vessel’s
capacity. It is ready to fill up, not hungry to consume, and it can hold no more sky.
Being not more than yourself, or wanting no more than what you are given, is a solid
place to begin. For genuine humility, the beyond and unexpected might almost seem
to delight in planning pleasant surprises, but unexpected good fortune comes simply
from not expecting. You know when and where you belong, only maybe not why.
08.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.2: canyon holds risks, seek modest gains)
Joining with them comes from within
Commitment is promising
08.2x Joining with them comes from within:
Nothing of one’s own (is) given up
To join with them feels like the right thing to do. The heart says to go now, and what
seems like a resonance echoes. Of course the heart has no sense and no brains, and
none have not learned the hard way that belonging the wrong way can injure original
nature. The timely question to ask of this joining may be: can you be yourself here?
This does not mean all of yourself. Nor does it mean that you could be here forever.
It does not mean being supported, or encouraged in all your more private endeavors.
Nothing will be guaranteed here. All the affairs of the heart are risks, of pain soon,
and later, resentment. But often the pain will be in perfect proportion to what  is not
asked with modesty. If all that you ask is to not lose the core of yourself, this much
is easy to watch.