all your eggs in one basket, and Watch That Basket. —Mark Twain
* You gain strength, courage and confidence by every experience in which you
really stop to look fear in the face. You must do the thing which you think you
cannot do. —Eleanor Roosevelt
* For all on a razor’s edge it stands. —Homer, The Iliad
* A decent boldness ever meets with friends. —Homer, The Odyssey
* Necessity, mother of invention. —William Wycherley
* A good scare is worth more to a man than good advice. —Edgar Howe
* Every man has a right to risk his life in order to preserve it. —Rousseau
* I am glad to the brink of fear. —Ralph Waldo Emerson
* “I can’t explain myself, I’m afraid, sir,” said Alice,
“because I’m not myself, you see.”
 “I don’t see,” said the caterpillar. —Lewis Carroll
* That which does not destroy me makes me stronger. —Nietzsche
* Life shrinks or expands according to one's courage. —Anais Nin
* Fear is a question: What are you afraid of, and why?  Just as the seed of health
is in illness, because illness contains information, your fears are a treasure house
of self- knowledge if you explore them. —Marilyn Ferguson
232

GUA 30, LI2, ARISING
 
  Binary 101 101 = 45; Li below, Li above; Chong Gua
30.X, Overall Image
The light appears twice
Arising
The mature human being, accordingly,
Is continuous in clarifying and illuminating
into the four directions
Flaming beauty consuming the present is mounted on flames consuming the past.
Sunshine hides to rise again. It hides in the logs to flame again. It hides in the grass,
in the salad, in the silos, in the cow, in the steak, and it flames up again as mind in
the beings. The flame is not feeding on fuel, it is or was the fuel, sunlight mingled
with water and wind. Now it’s transforming again. The sage consumes the light of
his ancestors and his breakfast too. To honor what he consumes he ignites himself
and lights up in all four dimensions, consuming the past and present and licking at
tomorrow. Life is a fountain of well-informed light and spirit is how well it forms.
30.0, Arising
Meriting persistence
Fulfillment
Attend to the cow
Promising
Existence means to stand out, while standing upon what upholds us, to be free in a
forward direction, while dependent on all of our sources. As sun and moon cling to
heaven and the living things to earth, as life must turn on nature and each thing in its
turn be eaten, as the flame needs the logs to transform in order to free more light, so
does the brightest of sages rely upon his darker depths, simpler conditions and the
body that fools call a house for the soul. Thus he is seen hard at work, attending
to his less spectacular nature, not above chopping wood, unashamed to carry water,
the visionary leader of a herd of cows. When it is one with the work, spirit becomes
a verb. The debt to place and source is honored with liberation, a debt to background
best paid by standing out from it, like the oriole stands out against the winter’s tree.
Yet flames go out when they go beyond their connections and networks of sources.
Emanation, upon further reflection, merely describes one of many directions in time.
The height of the flame in time is the length of the moment and darkness is only a
promise that life is ready to light up and go. It’s no wonder the flame likes to dance.
233

30.M, Key Words
Radiate, diversify, individuate, glow, distinguish self; depart, go on; energy cycles
Fire, flame, light, ignition, sunlight, beauty, radiance; transformational processes
Coherence, m oment, pr esence, attention, sentience, intelligence, enlightenment
Dependence on fuel, relying on place and conditions; photosynthesis, metabolism
Temporally conditioned consciousness, dependent arising; ap pearances, seeming
Inherent in & adhering to conditions; instance, existence, articulation; continuum
30.G, From the Glossary
li2 (to) rise, arise, radiate, diverge, separate, contrast, depart, differ, digress, part,
get distance, distinguish (from, out of); articulate, leave, sprea