and
knowledge. We can learn things in life either way, but we tend to perish first hand.
80

04.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.5: evanescent as sweat, cries; scatter stockpiles)
Youthful inexperience
Opportune
04.5x Youthful inexperience holds opportunity:
Accepting (is) the way to gain access
And then there are fine forms of foolishness. Some will say that it takes two decades
for young human beings to grow: enough time for body and brain to mature. Others
might claim this could take at least two million more years. One who claims this sort
of youth will not be an ignorant fool and the questions will keep on coming forever.
Why stop growing? Ignorance can be ten times the work and has no freedom or fun,
no healthy laughter or play. It is dying to grab hold of the answers. The young ones,
with their long youth, have much to teach the mature. A sage remains ready to learn:
answers can’t fill up his questions, beliefs can’t end his search. He still wants to be
everywhere, suspending belief and disbelief both, fingers in all of the pies when not
giving lectures on virtue and worth. Why call one who would kill this “mature”?
04.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.6: seasoned noble assumes mandate, lessers not used)
Smiting the halfwit
Not worthwhile to practice transgression
Worthwhile to defend from transgression
04.6x Worthwhile (and) productive to defend from transgression:
Those above (and) those below make peace
We will teach him a lesson he will never forget. We will teach him a thing or two.
What sort of wise teachings are these? Was he told he’d be beaten? Is this what
is due? Have mistakes already hurt more? Most of the higher primates are most
of the time at peace. Now and then an alpha w ill bite or thump on a beta, or twice
sometimes on a rival. But where do we draw humanity’s line? And where do we  go
across it? Supposing the point is to give an act negative value, when consequences
are otherwise absent, to mimic a fair and just world. Do we give only fair and just
pain? Are extreme measures fairly measured? Is the precious freedom to risk and
make errors preserved? Discipline is for the disciple, something to choose to adopt,
not something to discipline into disciples. A proper response will lead to this choice.
81

04, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 49, Ge, Seasonal Change
qian gua (inverse): 03, Zhun, Rallying
jiao gua (reverse) : 39, Jian, Impasse
hu gua (nuclear) : 24, Fu, Returning
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
04, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yod; Path between Malkuth and Hod (Trad: Tp-Cd)
* Tarot: The Hermit (Inquiry)
* Astrology: Sixth House, Mutable Earth, Virgo
04, Quotations
* Stay hungry, stay foolish. —motto from The Whole Earth Catalog
* It is not the answer that enlightens, but the question. —Eugene Ionesco
* In order to digest food, a man needs a stomach. Who troubles himself to inquire,
however, whether a would-be wise man is correspondingly well prepared?
—Idries Shah, Reflections
* What one knows is, in youth, of little moment; they know enough who know
how to learn. —Henry Adams
* Lessons are not given, they are taken. —Cesare Pavese
* A man has no ears for that to which experience has given him no access.
—Nietzsche, Ecce Homo.
* I was gratified to be able to answer promptly, and I did. I said I did not know.
—Mark Twain
* A prudent question is one half of wisdom. —Francis Bacon
* Good judgment comes from experience, and experience comes from bad
judgment. —Barry LePatner
82

GUA 05, XU1, ANTICIPATION
 
  Binary 111 010 = 58; Qian below, Kan above
05.X, Overall Image
The clouds rise into the sky
Anticipation
The noble young one, accordingly,
Takes refreshment and sustenance
With peace of mind and cheer
The plump, wet clouds have released nothing yet, obeying celestial rules, but not the
demands of beings in thirst below. Desire and purpose belong to life, not the stars.
What will be a blessing some day is now a troubled hope. But the time is always
pe