eir pruning back
through the process of divination, was to take many decades. By the time this
phase was completed and the testing underway, the Duke of Zhou, and you, and
all of the founding mem bers of your group had joined the illustrious ancestors.
These several decades had been a rare moment in history. Much history was
written. The very language with which the history was written was developed in
some part by this very group, the Wu Xian. And the school lived on. After many
years of testing, this method of divining changes, known then simply as Yi or Bu
Shi, stalk divination, was put into practice as a system i ndependent of and apart
from that of shell and bone. It took the name for several reasons. Change ( yi) was
of course its subject. It was easy ( yi) to use or user friendly. And by now it was
known that there may never be a final or finished version - the book itself would
never stop changing. That was the inside joke. The relative ease of the method of
yarrow stalk manipulation, together with the increasing scarcity of shells, would
contribute greatly to its success. It soon became the primary form of divination for
all matters not central to the sovereign's major rituals and affairs of state.
The school inherited a great wealth of loosely organized information from its
founders. The task of successive generations was to organize, edit and practice
the method. The bulk of the work was done, but the finishing touches would take
almost as long as the prototype. The importance of how the work was presented
would develop in proportion to its popularity, and this gradually became a big
concern. Internally, these diviners had become a school which had a common
array of perceptual tools and a shared method of working with problems (rather
than calling it a philosophy). This system of understanding shared much with that
of diviners in general. Members were first of all counselors. The task of this guild
was to help others make the best choices. At first, these others were the nobility,
the royalty and, ultimately, the sovereign. The diviners were the sworn foes of
falseness, error, ignorance and anxiety. They now had a language o
f their own.
They could use this system to organize their thoughts and experiences, as well as
to communicate with each other. What would happen when this system, with all
of its mysteries, information, strategy, lore and collected wisdom began to spread
beyond the supervision of the guild? They were well aware that it would: this
system was easy to use and yarrow stalks were easy to come by. The concerns
would be need to be addressed without words in the editing of the work.
One aspect of the editing concerned the great range of depths in the vision
and understanding of the people who would use this tool. This would require
that a kind of ambiguity be built into the text: not a right vs. left ambiguity, since
this would work against the whole purpose of the Yi, but an up-and-down kind.
The words of the text would be selected for their ability to carry many levels of
interpretation. One group of readers would only see the mantic formula and the
prognostications simply repeated throughout the text. Another would see t hese
presented in a wide range of aspects, with no two facets of these jew els ever
facing in quite the same direction. At the middle to deeper levels of interpretation
would wait much of the text’s very frequent humor, which was always subtle,
often wry or tongue-in-cheek and sometimes quite dark. At one level an image
511

might appear to be dire prediction or warning, on another, a caracature or parody.
On one level was an unexpected outcome, on another a delicious bit of irony.
There would be no introduction at all to the work. The structural dimensions,
which at the time were considerably fewer in number than later analysis would
postulate, would not be pointed out. In fact, most of the tracks leading back to
the authors and their methods would be covered up. Even the arrangeme