oons and even great nations.
Security in changing times is to know how securely time changes, knowing where
the world has gone by learning how to read the signs. The clockworks of heaven is
no toy to play with. We imagine it as our timepiece but cannot decide if it moves too
slow or too fast. Just when we figure this out, and make our stable adjustments, the
world moves into next season. We confuse the fresh with the antiquated. Sometimes
we’re seen destroying ourselves when insecurity threatens. To move change along
among ourselves needs both tact and timing: belief only follows achievements, and
human denial is a powerful thing. The old will not learn to yield to a process soon
to replace it. A government will not be open enough to experiment with new forms.
Every new generation owes itself one revolution, to break contracts it never made.
The old hides are thrown off, we let our insides out, and the light bathes and cleans
our feelings. A complete human being airs out the house, runs naked into the lake.
347

49.M, Key Words
Strip, shed skin or fur, lay bare, molt, cast off, unveil, disburden; summer clothes
Rawhide, leather, encrustations, shells; protective coverings, restraints, precedents
Protective membranes dated, outmoded, no longer needed; calluses & callousness
Obsolescence, anachronism, aging institutions; things resisting change superseded
Change, renewal, overthrow, overturn, turnaround, revolution; reform, unburden
Divestment, revisions, re-envisionings, renovations, metamorphosis, outgrowing
49.G, From the Glossary
ge2 (to) change, alter, transform, degrade, take away, supersede, set aside, reform,
replace, modify, amend, renovate, renew, revolve, change seasons, molt, shed
(skin), have (had) enough, divest, strip, flay, peel, get rid of, cast off, eliminate,
revolt, break with past, overthrow; (a, the) changing (of), revolution, seasonal
change, animal hide, rawhide, skin, leather (not fur, implies hair removed); of
change
49.T, Tuan Zhuan
Seasonal change
Water (and) fire subdue each other
Two women dwell together
(But) their aims are not mutual gain
So this is called seasonal change
Complete the day and then be sure:
Change and then believe in it
Refinement (and) clarity behind satisfaction
Great fulfillment (is) according to correctness
Change is then appropriate
One’s regrets then pass
Heaven (and) earth change and so the four seasons are fulfilled
Tang and Wu changed the mandates
Complying with heaven while resonating with humanity
Seasonal change’s opportune timing (is) very important now!
348

49.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.1: persuaded in one’s big toe)
Wrapped with golden rawhide
49.1x Wrapped with golden rawhide:
Not suited to taking action
Like nearly everyone else, he still wears his golden ruminant suit and conforms to
the ways of his herd, bound to earlier times, restrained by collective uncertainties.
He tries to be docile, and grazes wherever he’s l ed. But the summer sun rises high
in the sky. His hide begins to feel wrong and the skin starts to tighten. He might still
conform on the outside; inside he sweats and grows itchy, far too annoyed to sit and
chew cud in the shade, furious at those who set fashions and trends. Like the time,
he is getting ripe under there. To divest himself of this ill-suited nonsense is not a
pleasant choice either, though even the slowest of cattle are starting to rub the fence.
His hidebound behavior and morals are set against reform, without room to wiggle,
as rawhide will harden into its shape. Meanwhile the rebels all get to wear loincloths.
49.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.2: frightened outcries, not a night for battle)
Complete the day and then change arrives
To expedite is promising
Not a mistake
49.2x Complete the day (and) change arrives:
Taking steps earns due reward
Belief will follow attainment, as the summer will follow the solstice. People take time
in catching up to the present. One who might be a star-g