ity
(And) all under heaven  make great advances
Chance encounter’s proper timing (is) very important here!
318

44.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.1: lurking dragon, not at all useful)
Secured by a metal brake
Persistence is promising
Have somewhere to go
Look at the unfortunate
The weak swine is sure to dig in and struggle
44.1x Secured by a metal brake:
The flexible nature (is) led along
She has only to pass by at a distance and this lively beast is already ready to romp.
But she is no sign from heaven, so he stops it before it begins, holds and hobbles
his horses, sets his brake like some prosthetic patience, checking his behavior, his
will with his won’t. Motive is hardly life’s problem, until futility and randomness
get to it and wear it down. Sure, she is alluring, beguiling and attractive. But he’d
only be led amiss, with his wantonness still wanting purpose. Any weak swine could
loosen up and give chase here, or go whole hog after this trouble. But this is inferior
force: his weakness would lead or be dominant. With no restraint he would have
no choice but to go. If self-restrained, he can still keep the choices. To choose to go
forth is only the question of when to let go. Persistence in resistance is promising.
44.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.2: bind them with rawhide, not one gets loose)
The creel holds a fish*
Nothing is wrong
But this will not benefit the guests
44.2x The creel holds a fish:
Understandably not extended to the guests
He has a rare fish in his tank, and his guests expect to be fed soon. But none will
really blame him for refusing to feed them his pet. What worth has treasure when
given away on a whim? His bright and wild concubine can think circles around the
king, but when the king comes to visit, she will keep a dumb and coy silence, that
the king might remember his kingdom. Yes, she is quite a catch, but she is not his
to offer. Most any thing can be thought, and many of these acted out. Any wealth
can be given away. But this theory does not need proving. Our urges do not need
to turn into urgencies. He will  keep the lid on and lights off. There is not even food
for thought here. Of course as a child they taught him to share. And now he is all
grown up and reserved, and parenting and saving himself. But probably not forever.
319

44.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.3: incorporating long-standing virtue, steadfastness)
A rump with no skin
One’s progress is inferior now
Brutal
But not a complete mistake
44.3x One’s progress (is) second-rate now:
Advancing (but) now not being dragged
She made him a very interesting offer, and he found that he couldn’t say no. But he
does not come away with a blushing bride: he’ll barely get out of this with a lesson.
He did not expect this when she first came to meet him. She appeared so soft and
yielding, so harmless and sweet, not all bent out of shape in her mind and twisted
up in her preferences. Indeed, that was a very bent night. Badly whipped about the
thighs, lucky to escape with his skin, he walks with great effort now, but needs not
be dragged. Note how today his footsteps all point the same way: he is learning to
lead himself, a little more sheepishly now, which is probably for the best. She was
right about one thing, though: he has been a naughty boy. No skipping or dancing,
and maybe no sitting this month. He totters away out of danger, to find a cute nurse.
44.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.4: regrets pass, in field take three kinds of game)
The creel holds no fish
Dawning disappointment
44.4x Wanting the fish in one’s disappointment:
(So) far from the others
He thinks that he might be ready for some of those other fish in the sea. He may
have a tank for his fish, but he has no trap, no bait, no line, no hook and no net, and
none of that water that fish like to swim in. He might have a room with a roof, but
where are the chairs and the candles, the wine, the music and the fire