he order of things and
mistaking branches for roots. We should not be using speculative interpretations
as algorithms for decoding the original text. Scholarship from the Middle Zhou
onward has added a great number of “fundamental” dim ensions to the  Zhouyi,
dimensions which were used by early scholars to extricate meanings and words
from the original text, and dimensions which all have their place and geometry in
the final overall pattern described here in the Dimensions section. These did in
fact yield up insights, and excuses to say clever and penetrating things. But in the
haste of these scholars to comment and expound, and then rest, they would often
overlook simpler dimensions which were truly fundamental in the original.
The modernists are to be commended for their efforts to weed this added
material out of our understanding of the Zhouyi. Unfortunately, in their zeal, they
are also stripping away many of the social, political, economic and psychological
themes and threads of the Chinese culture as a whole. Many of these themes and
threads eventually gave rise to variants, ideas which reemerged in such schools as
13

Confucianism and Daoism. It should not be so surprising to see a few common
elements, the ancestral forms of later ideas and even the original appearance of
some ideas which were developed more fully much later. W hile the approach I
take will not be as severe in rooting out suspected anachronisms, I have no
interest at all in preserving the intrusions of Confuse-us or Confusion doctrine.
The expansion of the Yi with the addition of the Wings is not the only
early change the Zhouyi saw. At some point around the end of the early Zhou
dynasty, around 770 BCE, the readership of the text appears to have broadened.
This is not surprising. The Zhou sovereign lost a great deal of power at this time
and the kingdom decentralized into states, leaving the king as something of a
figurehead in charge of the rituals. New usage would have spread from the Zhou
court to the feudal courts to the feudal aristocracy to the broader literate class.
The meanings of the words were indeed growing, along with the needs and the
applications of the book's users. The Yi was evolving into a book through which
major moral issues would be more frequently addressed. It is often pointed out by
commentators that a shift in perspective on the nature of the Zhouyi, as it was
perceived by the people who used it, occurred by the year 602 BCE, the date of
the sixth Zuozhuan reference. Prior to this date, it is said, the Yi was perceived as
simply a Bronze Age diviners' oracle and its manual. From this date forward it
tends to be viewed more as a book of wisdom and philosophy, of ethics and of
statecraft. This period of change has been seized upon by scholars as the era
when the simple Bronze Age divination m anual became a book of wisdom. No
evidence exists to support a wholesale rewrite or a significant change of content.
What really marks this change is that citations or quotations from the book are
being used rhetorically to support certain ideological positions. A much broader
circulation of knowledge is prerequisite to this rhetorical usage. As the circle of
readers widened, that knowledge had to spread as well. This is the reason it was
not used rhetorically or philosophically until later. Then it w ould become a
fashion to be conversant in these topics. But as the circle widened did the general
understanding of the text get watered down? I would not doubt this. Certainly
understanding of the methods and intricacies of interpretation would decentralize
and begin to show diversity in approaches, as is indeed evidenced in the
Zuozhuan.
The shift towards rhetorical usage in fact may be all that was happening,
but somehow, whenever this subject is discussed, an innuendo is left hanging in
the air like bad gas that the Yi might have changed its own intended use during
this period, centuries after its authors were gone, that little ideas were s