day (and) change arrives:
Taking steps earns due reward
Belief will follow attainment, as the summer will follow the solstice. People take time
in catching up to the present. One who might be a star-gazer, or calendar maker at
heart, will find it a little too easy to come back to earth three hundred years too soon.
Visions of the better tomorrows are not shared by many today. So why stand on the
corner now to share the good news with the people, or march boldly into the streets
to be swept along with one’s comrades in earnest and timely rebellion? Visionaries
have lonelier lives than this, until they can refocus themselves to attend to the great
beginnings, and hundreds of lifetimes of patience. The stones will grow legs and go
dancing about before humans will welcome the changes. Thus we wait until we can
point to the day when the old starts falling apart: it’s time for alertness, not certainty.
349

49.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.3: bound to mature one, give up child for attainment)
To expedite has pitfalls
Commitment is difficult
When talk of change has circled three times
Then be sure
49.3x (When) change (is) discussed three times all around:
Given that, where is this?*
It is not a bad thing that our cultures resist the latest hypotheses. To prove means to
put to the test. If this new thing to come along were unmistakably true, it might not
be so new - or the one to conceive it, so special. Theorized plans for global events
will not find ready support until tested in village and province. The sage might have
a plan, but he nurses the thing a while longer, collecting early data, filling in blanks
and holes in the theory, waiting for critical mass, even for two more prodigies to also
invent the idea. And then he might step up just to ask for a place in the background,
to watch how the plan works for leaders. The world’s pulse is taken first, and then
action is timed to be resonant. Let someone else begin it: their echoes will tell of the
timing. Then these ideas and plans grow like life, first from their roots and seeds.
49.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.4: silk jacket will wear to rags, on guard all day)
Regrets pass
Stay confident
Change the mandate
Promising
49.4x Changing the mandate holds promise:
Believe in the purpose
He offers up an unheard of proposal and suddenly nobody's laughing. Being in the
right place and time now, the decadent past is nearly revolting enough to them all.
The truly great revolutions are the earth around its axis, and all this around the sun.
All the best coups are bloodless. They’ll call for the inevitable, the moment it comes
due. The critical masses are ready, they’ll cheer and pledge their support. Now all of
those uncounted hands start to nudge the details into their places. The school, or the
church, or the state which has outlived its useful lifetime is ripe for its reinvention.
One creates with the least resistance now, while the world wants to turn in this way.
But there may be reasons to make this more sweeping, to get more changes made.
By next year things will be settled again: more change might again be much feared.
350

49.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.5: a pattern emerges, rewards and commendations)
A mature human being’s tiger transformation
Even before divining, be sure
49.5x The mature human being’s tiger transformation:
This one’s style (is) evident
The tiger molts boldly. His colors and stripes will leap straight into your mind, like
sunlight and night, not needing any translation. The tiger does not need to seek out
the oracle to ask about his timing, or run to find the shaman to read him the omens
and signs. He does not need to worry if others will believe him. His gold and black
will speak to the dimmest of wits. Strength is in evidence, explicit, lucid and ordered.
The mandate is only a thousand words long now, new l aws and guidelines are still
crisp and clear: lawyers have not got to them yet, so they