ntain tops.
And perhaps it is better if these are not one, save in theory, if their coming together
makes spring, and the overlap full of new life. Healing divisions, for the sake of the
offspring to come, the wise ones encourage things split apart to come back together.
Having the best of both worlds might be the only way to get the best out of ei ther.
11.0, Interplay
Smallness departs, greatness arrives
Promise and fulfillment
The celibate monk looks on, all agog, as even his god takes a bride, to keep from
going the way of the small. The sage mounts aloft on the world, and no one can
stop him, not even time. Lost are all one-sided claims to omnipotence, when only
one of two sides can be but a third of the picture. Heaven here on earth, living and
learning, raises up life made of stardust, lit up by light turned to sugar and wood:
it all works so well when it all works together and human ideas do n’t cut it apart.
Only the small can remain uninspired. What sort of matter would think spirit foe?
What sort of spirit would demonize matter? This lowly earth never was  very dead,
but what a treat now to see her so much alive. And lofty heaven never was wise, but
what a treat now to watch the light figure things out. Small losses here lead to great
gains, while giving up bad ideas is almost no loss at all. Not too much heaven and
not too much earth mingle in mortal mankind. A disembodied spirit has no way to
evolve. Yet most of us seem to want less of one or the other. What sort of masses
would want to drag greatness down? Why would a king not want a great people?
119

11.M, Key Words
Affirmation, prosperity, accessibility, availability, agreeableness, concert, peace
Reconciling opposites, in tegrating, conjoining, synergy, symbiosis, coexistence
Complements, interaction, interpenetration, interregulation, intercourse, harmony
Interaction, communication, attunement; th riving, positivity, affirmation, optima
To suffuse, permeate; the resolution of paradox, broad-mindedness, hybrid vigor
Healthy & productive arrangements; confirmation, facilitation, accord, interlacing
11.G, From the Glossary
tai4 (a, the) (free) interplay, harmony, peace, facility, prosperity, happiness,
success, extravagance, grandiosity; smooth interaction; affluence; (to be) har-
monizing, prospering, prosperous, pervading, exalted, honorable, superior,
extravagant, flowering, flourishing, great, affirming, broad minded, liberal,
extensive, large, permeating, pervasive, grand, most, extreme, interactive, safe,
peaceful, tranquil; the west wind; (to) spread out, suffuse, interpenetrate, permeate,
pervade, communicate (s, ed, ing); greatly
11.T, Tuan Zhuan
Interplay
Smallness departs, greatness arrives,
 (With) promise (and) fulfillment:
When this occurs heaven (and) earth interact
And so the myriad beings communicate
High (and) low interact and their purposes converge
Within (is) light and without (is) shadow
Within (is) strength and without (is) acceptance
Within (is) the noble young one and without (are) the common ones
The noble young one’s principles prevail
The common one’s principles fade
120

11.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.1: well-favored advance, great opportunity)
Pulling up thatch grass roots
And with this, another cluster
To expedite* is promising
11.1x Pulling up thatch grass, to expedite (is) promising:
The objective remains elsewhere
The beings live one life, born from the rubbings of heaven with earth. Things are so
interconnected, bound together with common ground and roots, wrapped with their
common sunlight and sky, that the notion of self as illusion is not so hard to accept.
Life is a network, as fellowships and families too. One mind is as much of a net as
two minds or all minds are. Thus, when the tug of some chance pulls at one’s fabric,
there should be little surprise to see movement elsewhere as well. When one sees
that things are about to get better, or that something good needs to be done, the kind
of movement