um readiness
Acting in a timely fashion; responsive movement; prepare, provide for, allow for
Forwardness, predisposition, inclination, initiative, earnestness, encouragement
Confidence, preparedness, contentment, satisfaction; using momentum and inertia
Complacent, smug, self-indulgent; enthusiasm as Theos wi thin, needing an outlet
16.G, From the Glossary
yu4 (to) prepare, provide, allow, (get, make) ready, prearrange, anticipate, pre-
sume, make allowance(s), take precaution(s) (for); think beforehand; be happy, be
content, rejoice (s, ed, ing); (a, the) preparation, preparedness, readiness, antici-
pation; willingness, cheerfulness, enthusiasm, contentment; complacency, smug-
ness, indulgence, swinishness, surplus, surfeit; responsive action, easy movement;
excursions back and forth; (to be) prepared (for), ready (for); alerted, cautious,
careful; willing, content (to); comfortable, satisfied, at ease, happy (with); docile;
idle, remiss; preliminary, provisional; already, previously, beforehand; elephant-
like, slow, heavy, ponderous, deliberate, inertial; in advance, in preparation
16.T, Tuan Zhuan
Readiness
Firmness resonates, and so the intentions (are) carried out
Responsiveness using movement
Readiness
Readiness responds with movement
Since heaven and earth (behave) like this
How much more true (this is) (for) establishing delegates
(And) mobilizing the reserves!
Heaven and earth behave with responsive movement
And so the sun and the moon never stray
And the four seasons do not vary
The wise ones make use of responsive movement
(And) as a result, punishments (and) penalties (are) specific
And the people consent
Readiness’ meaningful timing (is) very important now!
150

16.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.1: shock, fear and alarm, then mirth and laughter)
Proclaiming readiness
Disappointing
16.1x First six proclaims readiness:
The resolve (is) exhausted (in) disappointment
Life invented and held onto enthusiasm once it had proved its utility in setting things
in motion. For a feeling to do this much it needed to feel great,  even greater than the
beings who felt it, and this meant to exaggerate things. But this feeling is finite, and
not the object or point of its own exercise, and it is subject to damage. It needs first
to grow, to be nurtured and learn as it grows. It needs to be supported som ewhere.
Crowing about it too soon will let it all go, and all one gets for the effort are frowns,
scowls and other attentions of doubtful value. Ready to go is not needy, desperate or
anxious to go. To be earnest is not to be manic: such excitement is not contagious.
Patience awaits a response, even if only: Let’s not encourage this one. Then begin
again there. You don’t get a rhythm with only one beat, or the melody in one note.
16.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.2: hunt takes three foxes, claim golden arrow)
Resolved in stone
An unending day
Persistence is promising
16.2x (This) day will not end, persistence (is) promising:
Using the balance correctly
What a day this has been - and will be! You know that something special is ready
to be engraved in your memory, a story to tell your grandchildren. This could be a
personal best, a new standard set, an epiphany, an invention, a moment of perfect
beauty, a place or a thing never witnessed before, the stuff of a legend, then myth.
And for those who could not be here today, a record engraved in stone, something
not to be taken away. The rhythm and tune are just right, the balance is perfection.
The path to your goal simply shines. The moment comes, finds you so perfectly
ready and passes, leaving you in your glory. Now what? The peak experience lets
you go and trails behind you. How ready are you for yesterday? Have you been
there now and done that? Let the stone carry the day. Just don’t carry that stone.
151

16.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness In Excess
(Fan Yao 62.3: never beyond defense, maybe attack from behind)
Wide-eyed readiness is re