he position (is) correct (and) appropriate
You are just about ready to do your next and best act, a romp with a real, live tiger.
You have trained for long hours with the tamer of two, the one that exists in your
mind, alongside your hopes for a future. And now you can be certain that fate has
switched their two cages. Anything less than a perfect success will not be less than
messy. Even the tiger’s most playful nibble will not heal overnight. Commitment
will need to be absolute, but the greatest determination will not be the determining
part of success. To speak to your sovereign firmly and clearly, to say what you want,
with neither false pride nor false modesty, will leave no more room in your mind for
what does not belong here. You want his respect, not his pity. The true and correct is
what  will survive when one is this exposed. Either way, you’ll know your fate soon.
10.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.6: drawn by satisfaction)
Studying the footsteps, examining the omens
If these come full circle, supreme good fortune
10.6x Supreme good fortune at the top:
A well-earned reward
The tiger’s will will be done, on the tiger’s own terms. The results are now in, if you
know how to read them. You do not need to tread upon anything further. The path
ends. The tiger lies behind you. If you want to know whether or not you succeeded,
first look down at your feet, then back along your path at your footsteps. Now you
scratch your head, and think about how well you did. If you have a beard, tug on that
and make noises. Examine the omens and signs. Take an inventory.  Now count the
arms and legs. Look for missing pieces, or sticky, red puddles. Make up a progress
report. Debrief. Change pants. If the prints from your feet lead up to where you now
stand, this is a really good omen: it means you had great success. What a great joy!
But if they fail to go this far, it might mean that you have had bad luck somewhere.
117

10, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 15, Qian, Authenticity
qian gua (inverse): 09, Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
jiao gua (reverse): 43, Guai, Decisiveness
hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
10, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Netzach in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Seven of Swords
* Astrology: Venus in Air
10, Quotations
* One has no protecting power save prudence. —Juvenal
* If oxen or lions had hands which enabled them to draw and paint pictures as
men do, they would portray their gods as having bodies like their own.
—Xenophanes, fr. 15
* There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your
philosophy. —Shakespeare, Hamlet
* To be capable of respect is today almost as rare as to be worthy of it.
—Joseph Joubert
* Man is still a savage to the extent that he has little respect for anything that
cannot hurt him. —Edgar Watson Howe
* Though the boys throw stones at frogs in sport, yet the frogs do not die in sport
but in earnest. —Bion
* We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful what we pretend to be.
—Kurt Vonnegut
* The fingers of saints are still hot from miracles, but can they save themselves?
—Joy Harjo
118

GUA 11, TAI4, INTERPLAY
 
  Binary 111 000 = 56; Qian below, Kun above
11.X, Overall Image
Heaven and earth interact
Interplay
Their heirs, accordingly,
Enrich and complete heaven’s and earth’s natures
Confirming and reciprocating heaven’s and earth’s proper order
And thus supporting and protecting the people
The high and low mingle, to conceive the new spring. The distinction between earth
and heaven is blurred by the beings partaking of both. To set them apart in body or
mind makes no sense. Heaven begins at our feet, even when we stand in deep pits.
Earth ends at the tops of our heads, even when we stand on the high mountain tops.
And perhaps it is better if these are not one, save in theory, if their coming together
makes spring, and the overlap full of new life. Healing divisions, for the sake of the
offspring to