If pleasures are greatest in anticipation, just remember that this is also true of
trouble. —Elbert Hubbard
* We love to expect, and when expectation is either disappointed or gratified, we
want to be again expecting. —Samuel Johnson
88

GUA 06, SONG4, CONTENTION
 
  Binary 010 111 = 23; Kan below, Qian above
06.X, Overall Image
The sky together with water is contradiction in movement*
Contention
The noble young one, accordingly,
In undertaking the work, appraises beginnings
A boat afloat on the water, with stars above for guidance: a permit to go anywhere,
if the crew could decide where to go. With broad horizons and too many choices,
some might say that one way is as good as another, others might draw a line in the
water and take a strong stand on a moveable premise, others will claim that there is
a wrong way in all of the choices that sink or maroon you. The stars are impartial
but useless. The captain will have a compatible crew and backup plans before going.
06.0, Contention
Being true yet opposed
Wariness in the middle is promising
At the end, unfortunate
Worthwhile to meet a mature human being
Not worthwhile to cross the great stream
Advocacy, in systems of justice, does not begin with the truth, but by withholding
one half of the truth, then exaggerating the other. The hyperbole weakens the case,
and a jury and judge weigh double the nonsense, while somebody lies under oath.
Yet in legitimate conflicts of interest, both can be right and both wrong. Certainly
both can be sure, or an outer half certain, and an inner with no idea. But however
sure one may be, what is true may be worlds away. Inquisitors full of assumptions
can refute or validate anything, if they can control all the questions. But “true” can
be also a verb, a reconsideration of aim in terms of where it wants to go and what
it has to begin with. We true our aims and our courses. This will use our sense of
resistance and friction to make corrections in courses, adjustments best made at
the start of a journey, the midst of great water being a bad place to stop halfway.
But rudders won’t work without some forward motion, so the true must learn on
the move. The right idea is altered enough to accommodate the real: successes are
found where resistance and failure are not. Right and truth guarantee no success.
89

06.M, Key Words
Advocacy, adversarialism, partiality, partisanship, taking or promoting one side
Presumption, ch allenge, competition; ambivalence, approach-approach conflicts
Conflict, disparity, dissent, dissonance, points of view within the bigger pi cture
Resistance, friction, strife, grievance, litigation, dispute, cont est, confrontation
Arbitration, diplomacy, (re)conciliation, reconsideration, mid-course corrections
Revisiting postulates & reference frames, using feedback, finding metasolutions
06, Notes
06.6 The sky seems to rise while water is always falling and river-borne water in old
China tended Eastward, the opposite direction of the heavenly bodies.
06.G, From the Glossary
song4 (a, the) contention, conflict, challenge, dispute, dissent, litigation, argu-
ment, quarrel, contest, antagonism; (to) contend, dispute, challenge, contest, dis-
sent, litigate, accuse, argue, quarrel, reprimand, advocate, speak out publicly,
bring (suit, a complaint, a grievance), demand justice, plead before a court (s, ed,
ing); (to be) quarrelsome, adversarial
06.T, Tuan Zhuan
Contention
Above (is) firmness, below (is) risk
At risk and yet tenacious
(Means) contention
Contention
Being true (yet) opposed,
Wariness in the middle (is) promising:
The firm comes forward and gains the center
At the end, unfortunate:
Contention is not suited to completion
Worthwhile to meet a mature human being:
To honor the central and true
Not worthwhile to cross the great stream:
(This) leads to the abyss
90

06.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.1: simply treading forward, nothing wrong)
Not prolonging certain endeavors
The small will talk
In the end, pro