initial
reactions, searching for lines where resistance is least, or ways to enter the minds of
their subjects and fellows, while taking the special things into account. The path of
power does not simply blunder straight forward: it makes some allowance for how
much greater reality is before presuming to change it. The real and the ideal need to
be rubbed together for these adaptations to fit. This is why the mind is so elastic and
plastic, suggesting that life is for learning first, and only later for teaching. Thus we
begin with provisional plans and goals, then adapt our big ideas to all of those little
details, where gods and devils live. Then meanings grow where meanings belong.
395

57.M, Key Words
Penetrate, insinuate, encroach, conform, comply; gain admittance, entry or access
Nichemanship; occupy, adjust, adopt, adapt, conform, submit, accommodate self
Fitting in, fitness; subtlety, resilience, shape shifting; persuasion, sway; reconsider
Finding a path of least resistance; asserting without aggression, subtle persistence
In-formation, to assess before following through; learning and teaching processes
Reconnoiter, many-angled approach; rethinking, thinking twice, second thoughts
57.G, From the Glossary
Xun4 (to) pen etrate, enter, gain admittance, gain entry, gain access, reach i nto,
insinuate, coax, wheedle, infringe, infiltrate, influence; adapt, conform, yield (to);
submit, resign, accommodate; take (place, form, shape); withdraw (s, ed, ing); (a,
the) entry, access, penetration, adaptation, encroachment(s), admittance, adapt-
ability, accommodation, conformance, versatility, f inesse, subtlety, resilience,
[plasticity]; (to be) submitted to, put into, adaptive, adapted to, accommodating,
submissive, following, subservient, docile, humble; versatile, opportunistic; with-
draw or retreat to go around, with no intention of giving up; also pronounced Sun4
57.T, Tuan Zhuan
Repeated adaptation (is) useful (in) setting forth the higher purpose
The firm adapts with balance (and) integrity
And so the intentions (are) carried out
The flexible both respond to the firm
So there are, accordingly, little successes
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
396

57.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.1: returning to one’s path, how is this an error?)
Advancing and retreating
Warranting a warrior’s resolve
57.1x Advancing (and) retreating:
The purpose wavers
* Warranting the warrior’s resolve:
The purpose (is) under control
He vacillates pro and then con in intention. His small intent to move forward or right
is undone by another to move back or left. The subject or self is subject to a whole
herd of fancies and whims, which vote to go one way, but then change their minds.
The self is really a larger community, a collection of selves, always shifting. Often
there’s no one to lead, no chain of command, or no established set of priorities. It is
possible, in theory, to harness a thousand rabbits to pull the chariot forward, but the
ramifications and variables will harm net direction and speed. Each vector has worth,
but one is made null by another. A warrior will want a simpler harness, on a single,
spirited beast. His urgency needs the time, and clarity, not commotion. This is his
ruling thought, but it bends to his will and learns. He will not win a fight doing kata.
57.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.2: advance to cliffs, drink and eat, honk and honk)
Subtleties happening under the bed
Employing scribes and diviners, a confusion of these
Promising
No harm done
57.2x A confusion of these holds promise:
(In) regaining balance
Something is crouching beneath the bed, like wind stirs behind the curtains at night.
It nags at his rest from below and disturbs his soft zone of comfort. What hidden
creatures, low and sub-conscious, lurk down there, recessive truths in secret places,
unseen to the untutored vision? In the terra incognita, aye - her