d wind, subordination to the goal
Tension between what is and what must be, elasticity, necessity as a motivation
Dynamic disequilibrium, the energy of displacement, provisional ends and means
Actualizing potential energy; midcourse maneuvers; use of stress and momentum
Vigilance, making accidents serve ends; using uncertainty & insecurity as sources
64.G, From the Glossary
wei4 (to be, is, are, has, have) not yet, less than, still not, yet to (be), as yet (no,
not, nothing), short/shy of, still (have) (no, not, short of); not now, now not,
(even) before, prior to, without, lacking, incomplete; not (yet) ready (to); never
(a), will never be; do/did/has/have not; (to) lack, come up/fall short (in, with, of);
still not be, remain less than (s, ed, ing); if not yet; negation; no ... yet, has no ... yet,
not ... yet, has not ... yet; still / as yet un-; in-, un-; incompletely
ji4 (to be) complete, across, done, finished, accomplished, numerous; stately,
dignified, beautiful, up to standard; of help, assistance; across (a, the) stream,
river; (to) complete, conclude, succeed, finish, fulfill, perfect, achieve, increase,
accomplish, stop, cease, ford, cross; (a, the) river, stream; benefit, assist, aid,
contribute to, help, relieve, save, overcome an obstacle (s, ed, ing); (a, the)
accomplishment, completion, obstacle overcome
64.T, Tuan Zhuan
(To be) not yet complete (means) fulfillment
The flexible occupies the center
The little fox (is) almost across the (half-frozen) stream:
(But) not yet beyond the middle
To soak that tail
Is not a direction with merit:
Wanting to go on to the end
Even though less than suitably placed
The firm (and) the flexible (all) correspond
438

64.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.1: don’t pursue the missing horse, just avoid error)
Soaking one’s tail
Embarrassing
64.1x Soaking one’s tail:
Such an extreme indiscretion
The young fox struts out onto thin ice, as if the equal to his plan, like the last word
in high stepping. But then he steps down too hard on the low-probability outcome.
First hand experience comes rushing home, chilling his hot young head, clear from
the tip of his tail. Here’s a quick lesson in ends and means, a refreshing chance to
learn how to swim, something to groan about later, and reasons to insure his future
concern with success. Now he can truly imagine how crossing streams lengthwise
is bad. This is no great misfortune: he has only just left the near shore. Although
starting over means time for his tail to dry, it is also good time to process these new
revelations and become a little bit older. This is a fortunate message, sent straight
to his self-esteem. His mental life is drawn back now to practical ends and details.
64.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.2: no worry, accept present constraints as a blessing)
Braking those wheels
Persistence is promising
64.2x Nine second’s persistence (is) promising:
In balance in order to advance correctly
He remains a long way from home, but he takes a restful moment here on the shore
to study what he’s come to, adjust directions and bearings, and begin this next ford
correctly. He begins to test his brakes early in the crossing, keeping them dry and
riding them into the water, holding his horses a little, trading off a little much-needed
momentum for surer feelings of safety. There’s more to a journey than going forth
quickly. There is more to the chariot at his command than light weight and powerful
horses. The chariot will need to stop precisely as often as it starts forward, just like
walking in mountains means that  climb and descent have identical measures. Power
and restraint aren’t two separate things, but both will be the components of success.
Without momenum he’ll get stuck in mid-sream, without his brakes he’ll go too far.
439

64.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.3: cauldron’s ears altered, its function is impaired)
If not yet across, to go boldly has pitfalls
It is worthwhile to