d disturbs his soft zone of comfort. What hidden
creatures, low and sub-conscious, lurk down there, recessive truths in secret places,
unseen to the untutored vision? In the terra incognita, aye - here there be monsters.
And so he calls in the experts, to expose and uncover his fears: first a confusion of
priests and diviners to find and define the unspeakable thing and then a confusion of
wizards and shamans to coax the thing out and banish it back to the void, or drive it
into the light. To make it known or give it a name is often enough to empty the thing
of its charge. An  unknown keeps the attention awake until it’s thought to be known.
Sometimes we  like to know because we like to sleep. Mystery is a strong stimulant.
397

57.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.3: scattering one's sense of self, no regrets)
Recurrent adaptations
Embarrassing
57.3x Recurrent adaptation’s embarrassment:
The purpose (is) exhausted
His repeated attempts to push through all seem to push from the same direction.*
It may be time to rethink the worth of this whole approach. A breeze seems to have
more wits: when it goes its way with direction, this does not mean that it makes no
turns. At the first confrontation with what will not sway, it will seek out the limits
of what has opposed it. It w ill turn to the side to find itself free. It is broader than
its obstacles, it moves through a wider world. In firmness, it’s steady, not stubborn,
in yielding, it’s patient, not flaccid. Moving according to narrow ideas will show no
regard for the real. If at first it doesn’t succeed, it will fail and fail again. Repetition
is not continuity. We change as our experience grows. Trials should precede errors.
The pathological process and maladaptive behavior have lost their sense of context.
57.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.4: creel holds no fish, dawning disappointment)
Regrets pass
In the field take three kinds of game
57.4x (In) the field take three kinds (of game):
This will be an accomplishment
To focus on one thing at a time is not always the smart way to think. Suppose that
he needs to get three things out of the garden: a carrot for his meal, a turnip for his  
guests and a rutabaga for the sacrifice. If he only paused for a mom ent, and spent
some time in his mind, he’d find that he does not need to make three separate trips
with his shovel. Adaptive behavior is versatile. This is how a mind can make up for
all the trouble it causes, and pay its rent in the skull, how air and distance are useful.
We can examine our theory both in the mind and the world. We’ll think it through
first, start with a plan, and then change it as it needs changing. Hunting and seeking,
when bound or confined to the things we expect, will only use half of our wits, and
the game is too clever for halfwits. A flexible response looks into the actual niches.
398

57.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.5: correcting father’s fixations, use praise)
Persistence is promising
Regrets pass
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
Regardless of beginning, there will be an outcome
Before reforming, three days
After reforming, three days
Opportune
57.5x Nine fifth holds promise:
The position (is) correct (and) central
His first attempt throws him back on himself, as a breeze first backs up to overleap
the mountain, informed now by what has occurred. The wind, in ever-resilient ways,
keeps after the problem. Getting impatient too soon is thinking in one dimension,
and so many of our thoughts can be linear, like lines from the start to the goal, which
ignore both surprise and advantage on route. But there are more dimensions than
one. Even the shortest of moments might be at least six days wide. A wise one will
make adaptable plans. Three days before making his changes, he watches the nexus
of forces gather. For three days after, he watches how things are unfolding. At any
point here he is ready to shift his direction as needed. A process is n