their moods, awash in their feelings, clean, refreshed and replenished.
58.0, Satisfaction
Fulfillment
Rewarding to persist
There is a lot of proper time to savor enlightened self-interest. Life’s serious sides,
the long cultivation of character, careful choosing of proper paths, the short and long
term deferrals of gratification, pay off after some time is invested. To not taste and
savor the fruits of this work is absurd: these are just desserts. Nor is there need to
divide the high and low pleasures, or the sacred from the profane. If choices were
made to live well, then vivid enjoyment of a life well-lived should not be unexpected.
The wisest of minds will remember what it is made of: its living nerve and the nerve
to live. Now and again this wants stimulation. It’s still a big mystery, but somehow
the erotic dimension of life holds the key to creation of life. Appetitive behaviors, or
wants and desires, set us to work toward our goals. Happiness is not a good pursuit,
but the sign of a good pursuit, a sign that something is found. The sage loosens up
with his fellows, with all sorts of oral behaviors, plays games with his good friend
the witch, happy with wine and herbs, awakening all his best senses. So how do we
deserve this, with all our guilt and shame? With our gratitude, even with no gratitee.
401

58.M, Key Words
Free, open up, clear out; barter, bargain, negotiate, weigh, exchange, pay, redeem
Enjoyment, pleasure, happiness, delight, relish, relief, gratification, self-interest
Harvest, reaping rewards, fruits; compensation, incentives, persuasion, satisfaction
Hedonics, pursuit of pleasure and happiness as intrinsically benign and instructive
Encouragement, desire, attraction, welcome; charm, enchantment, bewitchment
Ananda, eros, cheer, epicurean hedonism, need/want as driving force in evolution
58.G, From the Glossary
dui4 (a, the) joy, pleasure, happiness, satisfaction, delight, gratification, rejoicing,
openness, exchange, mouth, passage, opening, aperture; (to be) open, free, clear,
acquiescent, accepting, glad, happy, fond of, responsive, oral; (to) exchange, pay,
barter, deliver, give an equivalent, trade, transact, weigh, share; open a passage
through, open up, clear away, convert, gratify, rejoice; speak (s, ed, ing); [consen-
sual behavior, voluntary transactions]
58.T, Tuan Zhuan
Satisfaction
(Means) pleasure
The firm (is) within and the flexible without
Pleasure, accordingly, rewards persistence
And so it is complying with heaven
And resonant in humanity
(When) pleasure (is) used to lead a people
The people forget their weariness
(When) pleasure (is) used in challenging difficulties
The people forget their mortality
Pleasure’s great importance
(Is) truly in the people’s encouragement!
402

58.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.1: rump belabored, in valley of gloom 3 years)
Responsive joy
Promising
58.1x Responsive joy holds promise:
The behavior (is) not now in doubt
The things conducive to joy can come and go like the tide. The high tides are seldom
the problem and they don’t overstay their welcome. But when the fullness and flow
go out with the tide, what will sustain us then? One of the sillier things that we do is
to feed on ourselves. In the name of self-reliance, we may turn inward for strength.
But this is no place to draw the waters which have now left us. The trick is to find it
at low tide as well, when great ebbs leave us stranded from Ocean. The resourceful
folks might comb the few pools remaining, and make a game out of rounding up
interesting creatures, and enjoy the tide’s ebbs for variety’s sake. Joy can dwell in
strange places: after all, life was born in these pools and depressions. Life is such
that it’s hard to be whole or fulfilled by ourselves. We want a world to respond to.
58.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.2: bound to little child, giving up one of maturity)
Trusting joy
Promising
Regrets pass
58.2x Trusting joy holds promise:
A belief (in) the