able thing into some
deep, dark pit, thinking that he might have it cornered at last, all the while forgetting
that accursed things thrive best and fight at their fiercest down in the deep, dark pits.
Though now he is badly chewed up, and bloodied about the rear end, and moving
forward is hard, he still remains resolute. And he still thinks that he is the predator
here in this pursuit. He could try a new view of things, and wonder if he’s being led
like a sheep, as the predator toys with his prey, and then he could return to his flock
to follow the harmless old ram. And yet when he hears this he still won’t believe it.
He really needs a new leader, one who is not such a menace to himself. If he would
hand up our end of his leash we could drag him kicking and screaming to safety.
314

43.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.5: losing the goat with ease, no regrets)
Wild greens on dry land
Determined to uproot
To balance the behavior
Is not a mistake
43.5x To balance the behavior is not a mistake:
The center has not yet been honored
Day after day the simple, old farmer wages his war of wills with the weeds, fighting
the good fight on behalf of all of his crops, against that ever-encroaching wilderness.
Too hard or too soft a pull will leave the weeds rooted; both too much and too li ttle
resolve will not work. Such care for his fields is not to be lightly dismissed. A firm
resolution is called for in dealing with weeds. He will show them who is the boss.
Of course the weeds would like to succeed as well, and so this big task will not end.
This world needs all its small wills and stern frowns. But our farmer could use an
epiphany here. Most of these weeds he uproots, like the wild spinach and purslane,
are very fine things to put in a salad, and they volunteer up on the hillside where they
never need any watering. Maybe all that he needs here is a b etter name than weed.
43.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.6: arrogant dragon will have regrets)
No cry for help
The outcome will be unfortunate
43.6x No cry for help, approaching misfortune:
In the end, not fit to survive
He is lured far out and away, drawn way out to the distant frontier, to the limits of
credibility, by his unspeakable thing. An obsession has taken complete control now.
This far from his source, and just as far from rescue or help, his lines of supply are
drawn increasingly thinner. He fades away with his footfalls and disappears with his
vanishing trail. At this range his pride and presumptions run wild, and although he
closes the gap on his prey, what seems an easy victory could become a silent end.
To the cosmos he might have been always expendable, and possibly even unloved.
But the unknown tree who falls for no ears at least has its forest to fall in, and the
lonely stars in their waste of great power at least have the great sky to explode in.
Without a sign or clue, the lost cause will be lost effect too, not intelligence gathered.
315

43, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 23, Bo, Decomposing
qian gua (inverse): 44, Gou, Dissipation
jiao gua (reverse): 10, Lu, Respectful Conduct
hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 32, 50, 34, 14
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 3rd Moon (Apr)
43, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Malkuth in Briah
* Tarot: Ten of Cups (Satiety)
* Astrology: Pluto in Water
43, Quotations
* At bottom, it has been an aesthetic taste that has hindered man the most: it believed
in the picturesque effect of truth. It demanded of the man of knowledge that he
should produce a powerful effect on the imagination.
—Nietzsche, WTP #469
* It is more important that a proposition be interesting than that it be true.
 —Alfred North Whitehead
* This rough magic I here abjure ... I’ll break my staff, bury it certain fathoms in
the  earth, and, deeper than did ever plummet sound, I’ll drown my book.
—Shakespeare, The Tempest
* They are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with no