was a true dimension. It was not
a moment tracking on a line in a spatial metaphor between past and future. It was
deeper and wider than a line, like a mountain is to a string; it had a dimensional
space all its own, embracing the changes and transformations, and all of the many
options and optional realities of the beings. This new dimension became visible in
the old, familiar world and you came to see it always and everywhere at work in
the lives of the nearsighted beings around you. It was in this sense that you then
began to see through people and things, who and which were but parts of larger
processes, merely frozen by illusion and artifice in narrow little niches of time.
You slowly came to live within the ten thousand year contexts. You could see
the mountains crumbling in slow motion, whole civilizations coming and going.
This was not the first or the last insight for which you would have no ready-
made words. You understood that if you were ever to express these you would
need to do so in images, metaphors and analogies drawn from the more familiar,
mundane and sensible dimensions of existence. In the case of Time, this image
might be a tree, turned sideways in the mind, roots first, branches front. Or it might
be a flame, made first of sunlight, water and wind, building into wood, and now
changing back into light and heat: sunlight was moving on again. These
metaphors and analogies were to become your primary ways to communicate
with the others who had uncovered these odd perceptions, and they were the
504

only way to coax your remaining fellows, each according to their com prehension
and need, into glimpses of these insights.
At last you began to understand your craft. Tortoise shells and the shoulder
bones from cattle were not merely symbols of longevity - they were talismans to
work m agic in Time’s bigger picture, materials to make spatial representations of
Time’s other dim ensions and, like ordinary kinds of maps, they meant very little
without the conventions of scale, orientation and direction. What you were
divining was a landscape, a map of where the questioner stood, with forks in the
road, a weather report and tales of dragons living deep in the canyon. This was
why you were taught to face in a consistent direction, and to hold the shell or
bone in a certain orientation. And now you had reason to want to, for guidance
and orientation, to avoid getting lost in the next dimension. The lines of the
cracks were tracks across Time, like the history of things and the lifetimes of the
beings. And, like both of these, they were all forked and crooked with choices.
Finally, at twenty-four, you had permission to begin your practice. Until this
time, you had sat in quiet observation by the side of your teacher, like some owl
familiar, as sessions were conducted, to study the other half of your craft: people,
and the choices they made. An outsider would hardly call you an adept at such
social skills. The life of a Wu, a lifelong student within this shamanic tradition, is a
most different life to live. At least in your culture it was a lawful and accepted role
to play in society. You could maintain a fair share of friendships, as long as you
guarded your words, and your love life was no total loss since you were expected
by lovers to know some secret art, and you obliged them by being a good learner.
The secret, of course, was sincerity. You would never marry, nor would you have
any children, not to follow a rule, but a life steeped in change was too demanding,
and inconsistent with the security sought in a mate. But what you would m iss in
social participation you would try your best 
to make up for in perceptiveness and
offspring of another kind: assisting human history and evolution by helping a few
others, especially those in positions of consequence, to make the best choices.
The Work, as you soon learned, was the growth of your clients, and thr ough
this, the evolution of your culture. Your truth was not the s