and tangles to sort? In a state of mind with
warp and weft so confused? With implications and complications: the rules are on
the run here. Recover ten years in advance: let them go and head back to normal.
73

03.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.3: three years to conquer, lesser people useless)
Pursuing the deer without preparation or forester*
All alone, going into the heart of the forest
The noble young one is discerning
Which is not the same thing as quitting
To proceed would be embarrassing
03.3x Pursuing the deer without preparation (or forester):
In order to follow the game
* The noble young one gives this up
To proceed (is) embarrassment (and) futility
He was told that delegates could be appointed, but somehow thought this inferior.
So, armed with some training in poetry, but ill advised by instinctive knowledge and
lacking in second hand wisdom, our hero sets out to tame the wilds in three days,
and looks for mistakes he can learn from. So eager is he to bring home a nice prize
that he fails to notice the storm. The dark clouds obscure all sense of direction. Rain
erases his tracks. All of the things that he needs to know now were learned long ago
by his culture, yet tonight he might need to reinvent fire. To scout and to track and to
orienteer were mastered ages ago by the deer, who know the turf too, and all of its
hazards and tricks. The goal will win, not be won here. Luckily, deer don’t eat meat.
But if he can learn, this hunt will bring food for thought, for many years to come.
03.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.4: following to have success, persistence has pitfalls)
A team of four horses arrayed alike
The quest of a marital suitor
To advance is promising
Without doubt worthwhile
03.4x To ask and then to proceed
(Shows) clarity
His horses would not be arrayed and bedecked in their finest if he wanted his aims
and agenda kept secret. And yet if he followed only his aims, instead of the signals
and signs, there would be no communion today. To succeed means also to follow.
His mind has held on long enough, awaiting some sort of good signal. Good sense
said not to come with no sign, but he will not wait for two of them just to be sure.
This seems to be it: she does not look away, and so forward he goes to his maiden,
the bright, happy fool he has waited to be. His mind, with all its reins and restraints,
steps down as his ruler. His new leader knows what to do, having practiced more
years than the mind can count, nor would it let mind forget. Why did she say yes?
What’s wrong with her? Ask later. For now, they are both in good, loving hands.
74

03.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.5: honest return, with no regrets)
Collecting one’s riches
A little persistence is promising
A lot of persistence has pitfalls
03.5x Collecting one’s riches:
The ramifications (are) not yet revealed
The rainy day will arrive, but it will always look different somehow from the one
which was planned or allowed for. The wherewithal banked or hoarded or saved
for such times is not an accessible wealth. True riches are mobile, liquid and spent.
The right amount of insurance will not cover every conceivable problem, but asks
what needs to be covered and why, or to be discounted and where - what futures are
worth less today than tomorrow. The investment goes nowhere, or does little good,
while returns will diminish in proportion to fear and exaggeration of risk. Saving up
to save oneself can economize on economy using delegates, neighbors and pools.
One spare of every possible thing in one’s house will tie up half of one’s holdings.
But one spare of each thing in each hamlet shows a rich understanding of wealth.
03.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.6: none increase, someone assaults: fickle heart)
A team of four horses arrayed alike
Tears of blood, flowing like water
03.6x Tears of blood, flowing like water:
How could this be continued?
The courtship goes terribly wrong: all