ow linear it is to be stuck in just one direction: that’s a flunked intelligence test.
39.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.4: unsettled, ambivalent, going, coming, for allies)
If going is impassable
Then coming back means alliance
39.4x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back
(means) alliance:
The appropriate position (is in) reality
The frustrated traveler has fallen back to regroup in the tavern, to join with the others
in similar straits. And soon there is talk about forming a new expedition. When one
cannot make it alone, when every step forward means being taken two steps aback,
the only personal failure might be one of breadth, and not strength. And so the new
support group puts its partly experienced minds all together to assemble the better  
plan. In aggregate they will have no more strength than before. But in specializing
they make better use of each other, with new connections and contacts, new ropes
and strings to pull. A guide w ill do what a brute cannot, a cook can spare them all
some bad meals and a medic can care for the wounded. One can hope too that there
is a genius among them, to say it is bet ter to wait until after this storm has passed.
290

39.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.5: worthless neighbors, occupy and subjugate)
At a major impasse
Companions appear
39.5x (At a) major impasse, companions appear:
Because the center (is) defined
In the midst of the greatest obstructions, when the large and real problems cannot be
avoided, some of your most average people do some impressive things: they rise up
to equal their challenges and some will even help some perfect stranger in trouble.
Now here is one amazing coincidence: every single ancestor of every one of these
heroes survived their trials of life, and even their teenage years, at least long enough
to have offspring. As soon as survival is threatened the body will awaken old skills.
Then comes the warrior into the fray, taking this threat by the throat. Friends and
onlookers follow, wielding shovels and stones. What emerges in our emergencies
are humans at their best. Even misanthropes are impressed as people pull together.
But do these defining moments define who we are, or merely who our friends are?
39.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.6: wild goose feathers, may use in sacred dance)
If going is impassable
Then coming back means maturity
Promising
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
39.6x (If) going (is) impassable (then) coming back
(means) maturity:
The purpose lies within
* Rewarding to encounter a mature human being:
Thereby to attend to the worthy
He has already gone through the worst of the trouble. He commits himself now to
his years of reflection and wanders the forested mountains in peace, while thinking
the walls of the city to be a part of his past. But far beyond the gates, he discovers
impending trouble, coming for those he left far behind. Girding his loins with his
anchorite’s robe, he shows some impressive speed for such an old, gentle fellow.
It is perfectly understandable that some will choose to just go, while some will opt
to keep their compassionate vigils until the very last blade of grass is enlightened.
Some scout in the larger sense: they still must go beyond, to know what is open or
closed and to see where we’re going together. For such a service, freedom like this
ought to go unquestioned. How the society treats them says much about its future.
291

39, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 38, Kui, Estrangement
qian gua (inverse): 40, Jie, Release
jiao gua (reverse): 04, Meng, Inexperience
hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 16, 35, 51, 21
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
39, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chesed in Briah
* Tarot: Four of Cups
* Astrology: Jupiter in Water
39, Quotations
* There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, rough hew them how we will.
—Shakespeare, Hamlet
* I can think, I can wait, I can