g (and) sniveling:
Less than secure at the top
Maybe something went wrong at the gathering. Perhaps he tripped on his tongue,
or maybe they laughed at his sacrifice. Whatever it was that he gave up has not yet
brought lasting good fortune or luck. Now he pours out his d istress, and all of that
spirit that filled him, the hope alongside the dread, the certainties and the fears: all
of that unspent feeling becomes a little puddle of salty self-importance, growing at
his feet. But he gets it all out of his system this way, making room for a little more
gratitude. This may bring others around, thinking they might have misjudged him,
but if their warmth is founded on pity, the gathering might just be pitiful. Better to
let him let go, to turn himself upside down and get empty. Ideals we have sacrificed
for, security for instance, can often be the same things we need to give up to get true.
327

45, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 26, Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
qian gua (inverse): 46, Sheng, Advancement
jiao gua (reverse): 19, Lin, Taking Charge
hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
45, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Kether in Briah
* Tarot: Ace of Cups
* Astrology: Saturn in Water
45, Quotations
* I am an old man and have known a great many troubles, but most of them never
happened. —Mark Twain
* Trust in Allah - but tie your camel first. —Mohammed
* A single arrow is easily broken, but not ten in a bundle. —Japanese proverb
* They that can give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety deserve
neither liberty nor safety. —Benjamin Franklin
* To bear all naked truths  /  And to envisage circumstance, all calm
That is the top of sovereignty. —Keats
* To keep oneself safe does not mean to bury oneself. —Seneca
* Yet in thy dark streets shineth the everlasting light / The hopes and fears
of all the years are met in thee tonight. —Phillips Brooks
* How much pain have cost us the evils which have never happened!
—Thomas Jefferson
328

GUA 46, SHENG1, ADVANCEMENT
 
  Binary 011 000 = 24; Xun below, Kun above
46.X, Overall Image
Within the earth wood grows
Advancement
The noble young one, accordingly, is accepting by nature
Collecting the small things as a way to the noble and great
The young tree slowly crafts itself underground. Invisible, hair-like feelers, sensing
the least resistance, wrap and entwine the stones, becoming green shoots and then
harder wood. An intelligence presses to exact and build with the smallest available
things, each new molecule a little attainable goal to add up into a tree, reaching up for
the sunlight. Thus beings add themselves upward, making their flesh out of dust and
their wood out of water and wind, slowly improving themselves and their positions
with a series of personal bests, going above and beyond their roots. Steady forces
adapt and ingrain the true. Wise ones will not disregard the smaller developments.
46.0, Advancement
Most fulfilling
Productive to encounter a mature human being
Do not worry
To go boldly southward* is promising
Where a seed falls and sprouts is sel dom much of a choice. Where we might find
our various niches may also be somewhat haphazard, but sense and humility help.
But next comes the time to make yourself what you might be, to occupy that place
with living nerve, to extend and realize a self. This wants some boldness and skill.
Wood pushing upwards grows with what is ingrained, it has the direction it needs.
Each animal too is born with the right to strive to be the best and the most unequal
that it can be. This boldness faces south, with the sun in its face, like the sovereign
giving commands. Willful intelligence drives a willing response. We dare to seize
our chances. Of course the big, quick, easy success will not be that great of a goal,
no more than just wishing for luck, so what we are really asking for here is a lot of
humbling work and the wisdom to find and follow the best examples and teachers.
And gre