Morality is moral only when it is voluntary. —Lincoln Steffens
418

GUA 61, ZHONG1 FU2, THE TRUTH WITHIN
 
  Binary 110 011 = 51; Dui below, Xun above
61.X, Overall Image
Over the pond there is wind
The truth within
The noble young one, accordingly,
considers legal process while delaying execution
The wind moves over the pond, pushing the small boats from shore to shore. Each
private pool is its own community, its own depth and surface, its own resources and
reasons. Wind carries news between them, food and seeds too. In wind and wood
are the secrets to seeing beyond, so that personal insights may gain overview and get
wind of the greater world. Things are not utterly relative: even the relative view of
natural law might know right from wrong, but special circumstances still mitigate
and aggravate. If the law will not permit the judge to sit down to chat with a suspect,
someone must seek out his point of view, be fair and just, and reach understanding.
61.0, The Truth Within
Piglets and fishes* - promising
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
Worthwhile to persist
It is hard to not be largely contained in our small and native worlds. And it is good
to enjoy being a pond, or a pool all our own, and to fill up our own little niche with
our feelings and meanings. We love the hidden places where our secret selves can
go swimming. We have privacy here; we have ways to make our lives feel important;
we can be as intense as we want. But wise ones will also sail beyond, when the wind
brings good news from the other, and welcome the boat which goes beyond the self,
to circulate, to push back those limits and shores and broaden their horizons. When
they go hunting and fishing for others, they first seek out the perspective and point
of view of the others, if only to find the right trap or bait. The diversity of life begins
as close as the family: early in life our young sons and daughters seem to belong to
utterly different species. Cross a great stream and ethnocentricity fails; and when we
choose to explore a more primitive forest or jungle, even anthropocentrics change.
There are vast realms of beauty here which the human eye cannot see. And yet when
we think that dolphins are smart, we’re inclined to seek only minds like our own.
419

61.M, Key Words
Inner, internal, central, core + sureness, sincerity, confidence, trust, belief, truth
Insight, outlook, understanding, subjectivity, self-interest, inner nature, meaning
Limited comprehension, internal assumptions, personal relevance and importance
Relativity, perceptual limits, horizon, the little picture; trusting a being to be itself
Standpoint, point of view, degree of comprehension, p erspective, communicating
Interpretations, translating differences, frames of reference; get inside to look out
61.G, From the Glossary
zhong1 (a, the) balance, center, concentration, core, focus, heart, inside, interior,
mean, median, medium, middle, midpoint, midst (of); midday, noon; (the) bal ance
point, stable point, point closest to all options; bulls eye; (to be) accurate, central,
balanced, concentric, concentrated, correct, in balance, inner, mediated, neutral,
on target, right, tempered, true (to); average, mediocre, middling; amidst, among,
between, in, inside, intermediate, into, in progress; centered in at the core/heart of;
halfway between, midway, in the middle (of); (in, at) the center/midst of; within;
proper, equilibrated, to the point; at mid-; (to) balance, center, concentrate, focus,
mediate, temper, true, hit the center, attain, accomplish (s, ed, ing)
fu2 (a, the) truth, the true, confidence, trust, assurance, belief, (good) faith, proof,
conviction, sureness, sincerity, reliance, surety, certainty, credibility, conviction,
verity, promise, loyalty, verification (s); (to be) true, sincere, credible, confident,
honest, trustworthy, truthful, assured, reliable, sure (to); (to) rely on, believe in,
be sure (of), verify, ascertain, validate, believe, have faith, trust, hold (that)