. Its energy conserved
through the changes, it is never really exhausted. It connects to the ever-enduring
and so it never runs out of motion. Even the doldrums and the motionless eyes of
the storms are part of its moving force. The wise, like the storm, connect with the
ever-enduring. Therefore, to stand firm, or to hold a direction, means balance and
adaptation. All one might keep is the long term goal, or a bearing or higher purpose.
32.0, Continuity
Fulfillment
Nothing is wrong
Worthwhile to be persistent
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Only some things that humans now do will still be unchanged in ten thousand years.
To persist, survive or continue means learning and changing, being open to power
and change, and turning, with these, to advantages. Thoughts, and other things with
sharp edges, do not do well against time if they don’t get refreshed and rebuilt now
and then. We like to think of our conscious minds, or selves, as continuous beings,
although once a night they seem to be nowhere at all. We like to think of our spirits
surviving through time, but who can say where one goes between lifetimes? What
thread through time is this entity? Between yourself and your cells, what is it that
you reduce to or keep? What will cohere or repeat? What truly needs to continue?
The moon seems to go through radical phases, yet in our lifetimes, it really hardly
changes at all. Ways of living or methods of coping are passed down from being
to being, like we pass torches and titles. This process life has for learning endures.
We are what remains of that plucky, old lungfish who first crawled up onto shore.
Some of that fellow endures. We persist by adaptation, not by remaining the same.
245

32.M, Key Words
Continuing, surviving, lasting, endurance, steadiness; adaptability, sustainability
Duration, protraction, longevity, persistence, coherence across time, consistency
Regularity, constancy, stability, maturity, integrity, proficiency, learned versatility
Self-renewal, self-regeneration, self-succession; the long run; alignment, mee tness
Keeping to path or vow, holding true throughout outer changes, dynamic balance
Perseverance, not always predictability or a sameness; resourcefulness, re silience
32.G, From the Glossary
heng2 (a, the) duration, continuity, continuance, endurance, steadiness, constan-
cy, consistency, longevity, sustainability; (what, that which) endures, survives; (to
be) regular, enduring, lasting, chronic, continuing, persistent, persisting, continu-
ous, perennial, perpetual, prolonged, constant, throughout; (to) last in, go on, en-
dure (changes), continue, persevere, stay, perpetuate, prolong (s, -ed, -ing); con-
stantly, lastingly, persistently, always, continuously, regularly, perseveringly
32.T, Tuan Zhuan
Continuity
(Means) to endure
The firm (is) above and the flexible (is) below
Thunder (and) wind support each other
Versatile and energetic
The firm (and) the flexible fully correspond
Continuity
Continuity fulfills (and) nothing (is) wrong,
Worthwhile to be persistent:
Enduring (is) upon one’s own path
Heaven’s (and) earth’s courses
Continue, going on and (on) without end
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
At the end, in due order, there will be a beginning
Sun and moon take the sky
and so (are) able to continue in brilliance
The four seasons evolve (and) turn
And so are able to continue accomplishing
The wise ones endure upon their paths
And all under heaven (is) transformed (and) completed
Comprehend what is meant to be continued
Then heaven (and) earth (and) the myriad beings
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
246

32.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.1: powerful in toes, boldness bad for confidence)
Digging in to continue
Persistence has pitfalls
Not a direction with merit
32.1x Digging in for continuity has pitfalls:
At the beginning (and) searching for depth
Endurance works best with an optimum pace, set for the distance to travel. This one
can hardly en