n Briah
* Tarot: Four of Cups
* Astrology: Jupiter in Water
39, Quotations
* There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, rough hew them how we will.
—Shakespeare, Hamlet
* I can think, I can wait, I can fast. —Herman Hesse, Siddhartha
* Sweet are the uses of adversity. —Shakespeare, As You Like It
* A loss rarely remains a loss for an hour. —Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom
(A good substitute for the inane ‘everything happens for a reason’)
* It is quite a three-pipe problem. —Arthur Conan Doyle
* To know when to stop is the highest attainment. Those who cannot do so
will be destroyed on the lathe of heaven. —Zhuangzi
* ... grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
the courage to change the things I can,
and the wisdom to know the difference.
—Reinhold Niebuhr, “The Serenity Prayer”
* An adventure is only an inconvenience rightly considered. —G. K. Chesterton
292

GUA 40, JIE3, RELEASE
 
  Binary 010 100 = 20; Kan below, Zhen above
40.X, Overall Image
Thunder and rain create
Release
The noble young one, accordingly, pardons transgressions
And is broad-minded regarding offenses
The tension builds up to its high point, but then it must let go. Thunder shakes the
sky loose with laughter, clearing the air and returning the world to normal. The seed
pods swell up and burst. The rainbow trailing the thunderhead sees all the stress and
tension forgiven. One’s self-destructive enemies, by definition, destroy themselves.
Unsustainable behavior extinguishes itself. The danger itself will promote an escape.
The causes of these go away. Things will get more tense and complex until all the
right factors are present. Then, when timing is right, suddenly things come together.
Judges pardon mistakes and misdeeds. Resentment is not a transcendent approach.
40.0, Release
Worthwhile west to south
Without a place to go
One’s coming return is promising
If there is a place to go
To be prompt is promising
The archer tenses his bow and takes aim, the readied arrow just flies. The sorcerer
gathers excitement and locks this into his image of what is to be, but then his spell
must cast itself. Holding on to this tension interferes with its release. The timing will
be the final addition. Now is the time to let go. Resentment and blame are burdens
on all those who hold them, so forgiveness is given for their sake and benefit, not
for the one forgiven. We ought to just walk away from our sacrifice, and not keep
possession of how great or worthy it was, or doubts about its greatness or worth.
The spirits already know just what to do. If what remained to be done has already
been done, to linger on things which cannot be altered, or to hunt down the results
is untimely. All you can do is to put the factors together, combine or blend them in
proper proportions and exercise a patient restraint until that magical moment when
the world and you both want to go the same way. The archer who hangs on to his
arrow misses the point completely. So does the artist who will not let go of his art,
and parents who will not say yes to their children. You have done the best you can.
293

40.M, Key Words
Delivery, deliverance, discharge, follow through, liberation, relief, emancipation
Loosen, disentangle, extricate, forgive, pardon, allow, let go, free, release, slacken
Explain, clarify, synthesize, reconcile, temper, transcend, alleviate, dissolve, undo
Release arrows; casting (3rd step of a spell: tense, aim, release); be done, move on
Begin anew; clean break with past, absolve; culmination, sublimation; untie knots
Both forgiveness and permission; options opening; redemption, not salvation (#59)
40.G, From the Glossary
jie3 (to) release, relieve, discharge, let go (of), dispel, allay, alleviate, dismiss,
loosen, untie, relax, undo, untangle, liberate, free, remove, temper, mitigate,
deliver, separate, open up, break up, dis perse, interpret, solve, dissolve, resolve,
settle, explain, understand, comprehend, get rid of, be free of, divide; cut or pull
open, apart (s,