is test is like looking for fitness, in the proper way
to understand the term, as fitting the facts, as being worthy of survival beyond
the life expectancy of the academic fads and fancies.
Applying these ambitious goals, first to the Chinese text and then to the
making of a literal translation, introduces another wrinkle or two. It is impossible
to replace most strings of Chinese words with the equivalent English words. The
Chinese terms are much br oader in connotation. Some of this task can still be
accomplished by using less specific English words, but then this often defeats the
purpose of trying to specify exactly what is being said in Chinese. If you spin a
translation to bring out an obscure bit of humor you risk missing the line's more
serious faces. If you translate a line to bring out its deeper levels and implications
you could easily miss the concrete and explicit intentions. You might add a past
tense to reveal what is being said (e.g. 63.5) but this requires tampering. So not all
of this attitude can be incorporated into a simple translation, especially not in a
literal one. This is my way of cautioning you that my translation may not make
much more sense to you at first than the any of the others. It is my hope, however,
that by the time you get through the multi-dimensional Matrix translation, which
will explore more of the breadth of the words and phrases, and the Commentary,
where I can expound a little more freely on the images and further develop the
metaphors and analogies, you will have a place to stand somewhere near th
e
meaning at the center of a text and at the same time have your mind around some
of its convolutions and ramifications.
In Conclusion
If it were to up to me prescribe one year of continuing education for the
modernist scholars, to fill in what they are missing the most (that’s in addition to
prescribing an introductory course in logic), I would have them doing field work
in cultural anthropology, far outside of the ivory towers and dusty libraries, living
with some remote tribe in some primitive culture, at least a day's walk from the dirt
road, in a hut between the shaman’s and the chief’s, with these two instructions:
1) they would take no notes whatsoever, and 2) they would take any instruction
or special medicine the shaman had to give them. And they could have this one
thing from Zhuangzi with them: "There must be the true man, and then there is the
true knowledge”.
As to what I have been trying to prove here, it is only this: Minds close too
soon, belief is a form of ignorance, and the puzzle that is the Zhouyi is not one to
accommodate simplistic solutions. To have a useable explanation is to stop asking
questions. I would begin with this advice from Carl Sagan's Demon Haunted
World: : "Spin more than one hypothesis, think of all the different ways in which
it could be explained. Then think of tests by which you might systematically
disprove each of the alternatives. What survives, the hypothesis that resists
41

disproof in this Darwinian selection among 'multiple working hypotheses', has a
much better chance of being the right answer than if you had simply run with the
first idea that caught your fancy". But I would keep spinning the hypotheses and
not even think of hoping for a final solution. There are many theories why the
Yijing is called The Book of Changes , but the answer to that might only be found
in the authors' point of view: there have been so very many “final” drafts.
42

The Structure of the Diagrams
The methods of divination, which are discussed in the next segment, yield six
lines, each with four different possible numbers: six, seven, eight or nine. Each of
these represents a different kind of line used in constructing a Hexagram or Gua.
Six and Eight, the even numbers, are Rou, Yin, or Broken L ines. Seven and Nine,
the odd numbers, are Gang, Yang, Solid or Whole Lines. They are written thus:
Six:        X Eight: 
Seven: Nine:             0
The Six is a Stress