nclination to
ascribe to the bees a knowledge of geometry. If the representatives of a culturally backward
people know how to construct huts out of logs, this still does not mean that they have a
knowledge of such engineering science as the statics of wooden structures or strength of
materials. However, if we were to study their technique, we could not avoid these scientific
terms to make the results of our studies understandable to contemporary readers. Finally,
how many millions of people have played various musical instruments without the slightest
knowledge of the laws of acoustics and the theory of music? ... . Thus, in studying the
techniques of thinking reflected in the Book of Changes , we must use our present day
techniques of thinking. p. 166
3

Correlative Thought
There are a number of ways to view the role of superstructure in analyzing the Yijing.
Joseph Needham, in Science and Civilization in China, Vol. 2, summari zed early thought
about what he called correlative thinking (at p. 331):
A number of modern students, H. Wilhelm, Eberhard, Jablonski, and above all Granet,
have named the kind of thinking with which we have here to do ‘coordinative thinking’ or
‘associative thinking.’ This intuitive-associative system has its own causality and its own
logic. It is ... a characteristic thought form of its own. H. Wilhelm contrasts it with the
‘subordinative’ thinking of European science, which laid such emphasis on external
causation. In coordinative thinking, conceptions are not subsumed under one another, but
placed side by side in a pattern, and things influence one another not by acts of mechanical
causation, but by a kind of ‘inductance’ ... . The key word in Chinese thought is Order and
above all Pattern (and, if I may whisper it for the first time, Organism). The symbolic
correlations or correspondences all formed part of one colossal patt ern. Things behaved in
particular ways not necessarily because of prior actions or impulsions of other things, but
because their position in the ever-moving cyclical universe was such that they were endowed
with intrinsic natures which made that behavior inevitable for them. If they did not behave in
those particular ways they would lose their relational positions in the whole (which made
them what they were), and turn into something other than themselves. They were thus parts
in existential dependence upon the whole world-organism. And they reacted upon one
another not so much by mechanical impulsion or causation as by a kind of mysterious
resonance. [pp. 280-281]
The more abstract the explanations became the more the system as a whole assumed
the character of a repository o
f concepts, to which all concrete phenomena in Nature could
be referred. [p. 310]
[Citing Eitel]: There is underlying these diagrams a recognition of the truth that things
are groups of relations ... . Causation is here represented as imminent change ... in the
activity of which divergence and direction are inherent. [p. 325]
[With regard to scientific thought]: the elaborated symbolic system of the Book of
Changes was almost from the start a mischievous handicap. It tempted those who were
interested in Nature to rest in explanations which were no explanations at all. The Book of
Changes was a system for pigeon-holing novelty and then doing nothing more about it. Its
universal system of symbolism constituted a stupendous filing system. It led to a stylization
of concepts almost analogous to the stylizations which have in some ages occurred in art
forms, and which finally prevented painters from looking at Nature at all. [p. 336]
[Developing a cultural analog]: The Book of Changes might almost be said to have
constituted an organization for ‘routing ideas through the right channels to the right
departments.’ ... Perhaps the entire system of organismic thinking was in one sense the
mirror image of Chinese bureaucratic society. Not only the tremendous filing system of the
[Yijing], but also the symbolic corr