nd perceptions, and
asked to take another point of view, by another person in person, even when we
understand that to allow this would serve our best interests. In the Yijing we
have found another way to suffer this, and so serve our best interests without
embarrassment. It is not the only way. The psychiatrist does not peer into his
patient’s eyes, looking for signs of dishonesty; he faces in another direction and
says “I see” a lot. The priest sits in the booth next door, hidden behind a screen
and a ritual. With the Yijing, well, it’s a book: like a door, it opens and closes. It
has no choice but to field any question. Its intent, and not-so-hidden m otive, is
only its original intent: to serve the reader, with assistance in finding the attitude
which will optimize a situation, without hurting the reader’s feelings.
At bottom, the Yi is a book about making informed choices, about freedom’s
being constrained only by the factual nature of one’s several options, and one’s
attitudinal response to the facts of these options. Even where only one direction
is pointed out, and attached to a prognostication such as “unfortunate,” there is
always sketched, by implication, an alternative choice. Is the character so often
depicted in the text meant to portray the inquirer in the near future? No: this is a
sketch, often a parody, of one of the inquirer’s choices, and a logical outcome for
this particular choice. “Unfortunate” means “look at this wrong approach.”
When our proto-human ancestors left the trees and began to move through a
greater variety of complex environments, the environmental pressures began to
select for a higher degree of neural com plexity, or better problem-solving ability.
Our large-neocortex genes survived when they demonstrated the ability to make
mistakes in the mind, on hypothetical and theoretical stages, before making them
on the ground. If one fails well enough in the mi nd, one looks for new solutions,
and a more prudent distance from the tiger’s claws 
and teeth. It is difficult to get
first-hand knowledge of all the mistakes a human can make, especially the fatal
ones. This capacity for vicarious trial and error became a part of the human Dao.
It is this Dao that the Yi is intended to serve.
The Yijing is relativistic and situational in both its world view and its ethics.
No statement is meant to be true or warranted for all times in all situations. To use
a close analogy: a language, for descriptive purposes, will contain a number of
contradictory ideas, such as up and down. But one does not then criticize the
language for advocating  contradictory directions. The Yijing is not, directly, a
book about beliefs. One’s belief in a tool is not an essential part of the function of
the tool, although trust may be som ething of a factor in its skillful use. While the
Yi portrays, in several places, a person approaching an altar, it never once
suggests what that person might be worshiping: only how, and how sincerely.
Has this person first covered the basics, so that some of the motivation for illusion
is no longer a driving force? Is this person having appropriate dialogue and fu
n
with the divine, or asking endless petty favors? The ethics of the Yijing are not
moralistic. This is, after all, the Book of Changes, not the Book of Fixations. The
48

good is seen in terms of “well-done” and “life-enhancing,” the inferior in terms
of “poor choice” and “self-defeating.”
There is no implication anywhere in the Yijing that all things happen for a
reason. Even the divine is an order without a plan, a direction without a purpose,
a design without a designer, an intelligibility without an intelligence “behind” it.
The intelligence is the sum of the decisions Life makes. Accident and vicissitude
occur even in the life of a person walking the straightest of paths, with the best of
intentions and attitudes, the clearest of comprehension, the kindest heart and the
sharpest mind. More than occasionally, the situation itself