whips up a furious storm. But which butterfly was it? The sage will take care
and attend to his smallness, give up self-importance to side with a vaster presence,
to side with what endures, and in this way outlives himself and his footprints. This
might explain his attention to seed, and why his eyes look beyond. The gods will
dwell in the details, but the devils will dwell in there too. So who will take charge?
Who will master this breeze? The masters are already up there, doing the most with
the least, at one with the wind’s wearing forces, watching for signs of life to erase.
107

09.M, Key Words
Complexity, complications, attenuation; chaos, complexity, little things adding up
Micromanagement, diminishing returns, getting caught up in the de tails, fussiness
Irritants, nuisances, trifles, worries, cares, distractions, the back-breaking straws
Attrition, erosion, small demands; wearing forces, shaping, refining & polishing
Long-term finitude, insignificance, limited influence, tiny pieces of big puzzles
Subtle persuasion, gradual adaptation and cumulative changes, fine adjustments
09.G, From the Glossary
xiao3 (to be) average, common, diminished, homogeneous, humble, insignificant,
lesser, light, little, low(ly, er, est), mean, mediocre, minor, minute, modest, ordi-
nary, slight, small(er, est), petty, tiny, trifling, trivial, unimportant, young(er, est),
minimal; (a, the) commonness, homogeneity, littleness, meanness, mediocrity,
pettiness, smallness; commonly, ordinarily; in detail; some small, of little, a little;
for a short (time, while); (to) diminish, minimize, shrink, belittle; does not imply
bad or wrong, but sometimes inferiority.
chu4 (to) take care of, care for, provide for, tend (to), attend (to), keep, raise,
feed, nurture, sustain, nourish, rear, bring up, support, shelter, cherish, train,
manage, cultivate, retain, restrain, tame, (bring under) control, herd, domesticate,
raise beasts an imals, brutes; accumulate, store up, gather, hoard, reserve (s, ed,
ing); (a, the) nurture, cultivation, culture, domestication, husbandry, management,
training; domestic animal; raising ... beasts; also pronounced xu4 in verb form, to
raise animals
09.T, Tuan Zhuan
Raising small beasts
The flexible finds a place and high (and) low respond to this
So this is called minor concerns
Dynamic and yet adaptive
The firm (is) central and so the intentions (are) carried out
After this, fulfillment
Thick clouds (but) no rain:
Value (any) forward progress
From our western horizon:
The influence is not yet in motion
108

09.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.1: advancing, retreating, worth a warrior’s resolve)
Returning to one’s own path
How is this an error?
Promising
09.1x Returning to one’s own path:
This ought to be promising
Small digressions are a part of even the greatest, most singular purpose. The path
twists and turns. The root learns to live among stones, learning by going forward
that the right path was not this or that. If a tree would grow its roots only according
to plan, no rocky place would have any trees. Instead they’ll explore the cracks in
the harshness to make themselves at home. The lightning, crooked as well, turns as
it learns where resistance to it is not. This does not seem to slow down its progress.
Being true to one’s path is not the same thing as being faithful to aim or direction.
Life is not the idea of living. Life is not life’s goal. Life is what is carried forward,
learning as it goes that sometimes it has second thoughts and sometimes less than
the perfect adventure. We broaden our paths a little and return with greater choices.
09.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.2: having no other goals, inside preparing meals)
Drawn to returning
Promising
09.2x Drawn to returning is in the center
Truly nothing of one’s own (is) given up
A young man returns to his humble home and greets the little woman. He kindles
a modest fire and enjoys a bite of dinner. And after they’ve p