in nature might kill and eat the runts of their litters to spare
the rest from diseases. Compassion is still a good thing, and a heart ought not judge
or choose, but denying selection is mindless, and harmful to all. Looking for joy in
inferior places is waiting for fullness in waning moons. The joy which derives from
ephemeral causes extinguishes itself. Enduring values will value what will endure.
Why glue autumn leaves to the tree? The secure joy accepts the due order of things.
58.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.6: study steps and omens, if full circle, most lucky)
Drawn by satisfaction
58.6x Top six (is) drawn by satisfaction:
Less than enlightened
It is in our nature to do things when we think there will be rewards. Life will even
build some of this into its structure, and use our own glands to play tricks on our
minds. But satisfaction still measures the success of our pursuits. Joy is only one
consequence of living life correctly. When it becomes the pursuit in itself, then life
gets turned around and effect starts to act like a cause. Then behaviors which lead
to rewarding feelings begin to become interchangeable. We will start to look for the
shortcuts. An identity built on one’s work, and higher purpose in life, is traded for
the quick fixes. We might be seduced from our paths by anyone holding rewards.
We’ll look for our signs of success in all the wrong places: it is always somewhere
outside us, somewhere to move on to. Inhabiting our places is our highest reward.
405

58, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 52, Gen, Stillness
qian gua (inverse): 57, Xun, Adaptation
jiao gua (reverse): 58, Dui, Satisfaction (chong gua 6)
hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
58, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Briah of Briah
* Tarot: Queen of Cups
* Astrology: Pisces Ascending, Mutable Water
58, Quotations
* Real happiness is cheap enough, yet how dearly we pay for its counterfeit.
—Hosea Ballou
* Unhappy is the man, though he rule the world, who does not consider himself
extremely blessed. —Seneca
* What hunger is in relation to food, zest is in relation to life. —Bertrand Russell
* while you and I have lips and voices which
are for kissing and to sing with
who cares if some one-eyed son of a bitch
invents an instrument to measure Spring with? —e.e. cummings
* You have only to let the soft animal of your body love what it loves.
—Mary Oliver
* Follow your bliss. —Joseph Campbell
* Happiness is wanting what you get. —Anon
* The trick is in what one emphasizes. We either make ourselves miserable, or we
make ourselves strong. The amount of work is the same. —Carlos Castaneda
* If the only prayer you say in your whole life is “Thank you,” that would suffice.
—Meister Eckhart
406

GUA 59, HUAN4, SCATTERING
 
  Binary 010 011 = 19; Kan below, Xun above
59.X, Overall Image
The wind passes over the water
Scattering
The early sovereigns, accordingly, made offerings to the divine
and founded ancestral shrines
The wind moves over the water, passing the moisture around throughout the climate,
bearing a myriad aeroform seeds, with hopes of life to continue in far distant lands.
The wind fills the sage’s sails as well, as it carries his little boat over great waters,
as a great spirit once moved, back when it all began. Trusting in that which endures,
he will sow his wisdom into the wind. Risking all for everything, he rises into the
higher states of existence, turning his life into example, his example into a teaching,
into a dharma. To survive in the long run means making friends with the boundless.
This will mean changing his state, planting viable seeds, and a temple when he can.
59.0, Scattering
Fulfillment
The sovereign approaches his temple
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
Worthwhile to be dedicated
The sovereign prepares to go beyond, to learn of a greater glory, to leap beyond the
limited. His ancestor’s message, his story, is heard across the ages. His own will be