erything fit enough follows.
All the parts of the whole are in play. Any denial of things as they are is bad science,
not a basis for change. To have it all is accepting it all, at the least as a place to begin.
What good are blessings not well received? What good is grace without gratitude?
02.0, Accepting
Supreme fulfillment
Rewarding the mare’s persistence
The noble young one has somewhere to go
To lead is confusion
To follow is to learn mastery
Worthwhile west to south:* find companions
East to north:* forgo companions
Secure the certain good fortune*
The fertile mare wanders the breadth of her w orld, with stamina and endurance,
noble bearing and dignity, and yet without thought. She needs no genius to figure
her aims, no pride to prance and no shame to limp. She simply inherits the ways
of her kind and all the sense that’s needed to browse. So many tracks may be traced
through one field that the number of possible paths has no end. When one looks at
choosing a path, what is real exceeds what is possible. To choose, then, begs how,
and life, which grew up with earth, has slowly absorbed some good, simple rules:
The path of least resistance is often the path of optimum gain. Securing the certain
good fortune will squander less effort in adding up losses. To follow one’s senses
is to use something older than mountains. To be still and learn is not to be stupid.
Then why does leading lead to confusion? Where is guidance first and best sought?
Leading is best when more is known and being responsive would make less sense.
But simply learn first and all the rest follows. Acceptance keeps all of the options.
To not assert such a small thing as self is to move among some far greater powers.
64

02.M, Key Words
Receiving, tolerance, gentleness, patience, openness, accommodation, gratitude
Assent, contentment, comprehension, understanding, embrace, room, allowance
Endurance, perseverance, acquiescence, compliance, groundedness, support, care
Potential, capacity, raw material, substance, suchness, realism, consent, upholding
Simplicity, naturalness, surety; latitude, range, breadth, largesse, fields of options
Power of possibility, first accept givens; absorbing, learning, growing, accessing
02.G, From the Glossary
kun1 (to) receive, accept, support, absorb, substantiate, realize (s, ed, ing); (a, the
)
receiving, acceptance, compliance, substance, matter, material, field (of options),
potential, basis, support, ground, capacity, earth; (to be) subordinate, humble(r),
passive, accepting, compliant; the earth; (a, the) female, rou, or yin principle
02.T, Tuan Zhuan
How consummate (is) receptivity’s source!
The myriad beings (are) provided with life
And so, (in) acceptance, inherit the sky
Accepting (with) generosity upholds the outer world
Character accommodates without drawing boundaries
Comprehending vastness, exemplifying wholeness
The varieties of beings (are) joined in fulfillment
The mare (is) the earth’s kindred spirit
(And) wanders an earth with no borders
Gentleness (and) acceptance reward persistence:
The noble young one’s purpose in going
To initiate confusion (is) to stray from the way
To follow (with) acceptance (is) to learn the principles
West (to) south, find companions:
And so, with the help of one’s kind, make progress
East (to) north, forgo companions:
Although, in the end, there will be rewards
Securing the certain holds promise:
The response to a world without limits
65

02.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.1: not far to return, nothing worthy of regret)
Walking on frost, hardened ice results
02.1x Walking on frost, hardening to ice:
The shadow begins to manifest
* Gradually fulfilling its nature
To realize solid ice
Grounds for change gather in knowable ways, are sensed before they are evident,
felt before they are obvious. Heralds and portents, traces and signs may be subtle,
but unlike expectations, they are legible here in this moment. Winter solstice marks
the end of Sol’s decline, but a laggin