ued the small things more, had he only been a much worthier guest.
Humility being a thing for the oxen, his boasts soon make an end to his welcome.
Thinking himself quite the phoenix, he sets his own nest ablaze. But as night falls
he recalls he is homeless. What he is is a repulsive bird, with burnt, stinking feathers
and no composure or nest. The whole point of a walkabout is in the return, finding
good, robust mental health, even though not having a home can challenge anyone’s
sanity, and undermine any security. Where going solo or solitary has only led to
solipsism, one has the wrong compass and maps, and a lot of losers get lost here.
If a mind has been lost, something important went first, like gratitude or perspective.
393

56, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 60, Jie, Boundaries
qian gua (inverse): 55, Feng, Abundance
jiao gua (reverse): 22, Bi, Adornment
hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
56, Notes
* 56.1 In ancient Greece, the gods Zeus and Hermes would disguise themselves as
poor itinerants and go door-to-door testing the tolerance, charity and character of
their people. You never knew if the stranger in front of you wasn’t in fact one of
the unknown gods. The benefits to the wanderer here, and what a social treasure
this myth was, should be obvious.
56, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chesed in Atziluth
* Tarot: Four of Wands
* Astrology: Jupiter in Fire
56, Quotations
* All that is gold does not glitter; not all those that wander are lost.
—J.R.R. Tolkein
* To live outside the law you must be honest.—Bob Dylan
* I have been a stranger in a strange land.—Exodus
* Think, in this battered Caravanserai
Whose portals are alternate night and day
How Sultan after Sultan with his pomp
Abode his destined hour, and went his way.—Omar Khayyam
* The use of traveling is to regulate imagination by reality, and, instead of
thinking how things may be, to see them as they are.—Samuel Johnson
* Much travel is needed before the raw man is ripened.—Arabic proverb
* If it is dark enough, one candle is plenty.—Arabic proverb
* To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive.—Robert Louis Stevenson
* Happiness is not a station you arrive at, but a manner of traveling.
—Margaret Lee Runbeck
394

GUA 57, XUN4 (or SUN4), ADAPTATION
 
  Binary 011 011 = 27; Xun below, Xun above; Chong Gua
57.X, Overall Image
Subsequent winds, adapting
The noble young one, accordingly,
sets forth the higher purpose in carrying out the work
The wind does not push itself into the crevice unchanged. It only adapts its way in,
so it finds a home in all niches. A feeler root, then a complex of roots, a will to live,
then a gnarly old tree. Repeated attempts will find the right path, as repeated steps
will make one. Continuous subtle influence makes incremental gains. Wind blows
and grass bends, so too with mind. The master repeats himself, but not to drive his
message home. He speaks once to find and learn what might be resisted and again
to complete the work. Science begins with hypothesis, not with developed theory.
A mutable mind is matched to a mutating world. Perception adapts or means little.
57.0, Adaptation
In little successes
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
Great minds learn to think twice, and not the same way each time. Learning can alter
the mind and what the mind sees. If a higher purpose is to obey higher laws, it will
let itself be adjusted, from the general to the specific, then look for the exceptions.
Those with effective wisdom will discover what is before they decree what will be.
The sage introduces his teaching, the king sets forth a draft of his orders, the diviner
offers a brief to the seeker. And all crouch behind these first words, weighing initial
reactions, searching for lines where resistance is least, or ways to enter the minds of
their subjects and fellows, while taking the special things into account. The path of
power does not si