ua, the one formed by the top three is
called the Hui Gua. The Trigrams are interpreted differently according to which of
these places they are found in. In the lower 
place they can often refer to past
experiences, present momentum and subjective states; in the upper, to coming
experiences, present inertia and objective possibilities. This simple way of seeing
the Zhen and Hui Gua  should be enough to serve the novice. The differences in
the way the specific T rigrams are interpreted in these places are discussed briefly
in Xiao Gua, The Small Symbols, in the Zhen and Hui Gua segments for each of
the Eight T rigrams. For further study, there is a segment on the Ban Xiang in
Dimensions, where most of the other and more complex dimensions of the Gua are
discussed as well.
44

Methods of Divination
There are four sets of inconsistencies in the body of Yi lore in English, which
I wish to clear up here. The first two are offered for general understanding; the
next two concern the methods of divination. There is much confusion regarding
the proper way to assign decimal numbers to the Xian Tian  or the Primal Heaven
sequence and arrangement. The resolution of this one is simple. The two binary
numbers are zero and one; by Chinese tradition Yin is even and Yang is odd; and
the last figure written in a binary number (the Top Line in an Emblem, Trigram or
Hexagram) is the One’s place. This means that the Hexagram sequence is from
zero to sixty-three, not one to sixty-four, and it begins with Kun, Accepting. Even
Shao Yong, the designer or discoverer of this arrangement, could not have
understood this: Zero was one of the few basic things that the Chinese were late
to discover. Arabs imported Zero from India, thus revolutionizing mathematics.
There is also confusion as to the assignment of two of the four Emblems to
Shao (or Young) Yin and Yang. The correct resolution to this is found in the
discussion above, as well as in Song dynasty writings and diagrams:
Shao Yin  is depicted:                     ,     and Shao Yang :                  .
Third: When using coins in divination, one side of the coin is assigned the
number Two, and the other, the number Three. There are disagreements in the lore
as to which is which. When using Chinese coins, there seems to be a moderate
preference for assigning the side of the coin with four characters the value of
two, and the side with no or two characters  the value of three.
Fourth: There is far less agreement regarding the heads-and-tails of Western
coins. On the “heads-equals-three” side of the list are the names of most of our
better English-speaking Yijing scholars, who occasionally offer the argument that
heads are Yang and therefore odd or three. However, on the “heads-equals-two”
side are nearly all of the Chinese names. There is no authority to appeal to. The
solution seems to be to make a choice, and more importantly, to stay with this
choice. I have always used heads as two. If you cannot decide yet, cut and use
three small disks of metal, wood or antler and make two marks on one side and
three on the other, or purchase and consecrate three Chinese coins.
Preparation: You can read, in a many places, a number of made-up rules
concerning how and where to keep and protect your books, and your coins or
yarrow stalks. These really all come down to one basic principle: respect. This, in
turn, means preserving your ability to learn: not being so full of yourself that
opportunities to learn are taken for granted. If this suggests the need for a ritual,
then use a ritual, wrap your instruments in silk and keep your books at or above
eye-level. In the Yijing
 tradition, self-respect is not a given: it is earned, in the
process of being respectful. We grow by learning, and we learn best by being
modest, or even better, by simply being authentic and sincere in our quests.
With or without a set rit ual, a session of divination is best prepared for by
choosing an environment which is free of distraction