n Zhuan
Adornment satisfies
The flexible comes forward and refines the firm
Consequently, satisfaction
Alternately, the firm rises upwards and refines the flexible
Consequently, a little worthwhile to have somewhere to go
(Even) heaven (has) a style
Refinement (and) clarity mean stability
(Such is) human culture
Look to heaven’s refinements
Thereby to study the seasonal changes
Look to humanity’s refinements
Thereby to transform (and) complete all under heaven
186

22.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.1: still toes, no mistakes, prolonged persistence)
Adorning those feet
Dismissing the carriage and walking
22.1x Dismissing the carriage and walking:
On principle, declining to ride
It will keep him up on his toes, so to speak, to search for the simpler life and make
a more humble progress. Who should he try to impress? He walks a mile first in
his own shoes, getting sure-footed and grounded. Remember when you were little
and you finally got the shoes that almost walked for you, and suddenly you could
jump twice as far? Pedestrian approach indeed! So what if the quicker things now
pass you by? Heaven meets earth at this surface of things, this is how humble it is.
This may contribute little towards getting somewhere, but there are other ways to
measure advancement. You are free to stand on your own two feet, to step off of the
beaten path, or rely on the footholds you’ve found. Racing by misses much. Terra
firma can teach you as much through your feet as the sages teach through your ears.
22.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.2: the carriage is relieved of its axle mounts)
Adorning his beard
22.2x Adorning his beard:
To partake in a higher prosperity
He imposes upon his natural face, lending a grace to the beard on his chin, hacking
away at prolific nature, hoping to uncover dignified form. The shears of the forces
of civilization stand up against the old, wild ways. Is this the real you, or is this a
mask? Is the genuine still in there somewhere, or does it fall to the floor? Is this like
self-cultivation? Is he grooming himself for the good life? Will he now be invited
to partake in superior pleasures? And if the shave won’t make the man, you bet your
beard when nothing can. In some cultures the men will wear nooses and leashes tied
around their necks, but some claim this is only men missing their beards. Should we
feign interest in social affairs so that others feign interest in us? Should we pity the
man clothing makes? Society grows like a beard: dignity lies in there somewhere.
187

22.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.3: dismissing appetites, ten years not functional)
So elegant looking, as though dripping
With enduring persistence, promising
22.3x (An) enduring persistence holds promise:
In the end nobody mocks this
He takes social graces as far as allowed, up in your face to get noticed. Glistening
wet, almost dripping with grace: can he still be more than a drippy, frivolous fop?
We think he can still be a man and be bubbly and oily, aesthete and affected, and
keep his purple lace underwear. He may on occasion need to back up his choices,
but this could help him build character. Gracious living, good fashion and charm
are higher styles of life, and it’s certainly good to be sensitive. But much in the mind
does not like its shallowness mocked and something deep in the gut deeply resents
all these elaborate surfaces. And what’s the deal with plant genitalia? Flowers are
there for bugs, so plants can have sex. How would you like it if you had the roots
and they had the knives? The real beauty is not about beauty: it grows out of health.
22.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.4: so suddenly, what a blaze, an ending, a waste)
So elegant looking, as if of pure white
A white steed, as if on wings
Not an adversary but a marital suitor
22.4x Six fourth (is) properly positioned
(But) doubted
* Not an adversary (but) a marital suitor:
In the end, no question
He