lity to campaign*
24.6x Lost return comes to misfortune:
The opposite of a noble course
He gets hooked on his highest hope, like a fish gets hooked on b ait, gobbles it up
and swallows it whole and is dragged beyond any hope of a timely return, into the
jaws of his destiny. The arrogant general can’t see the long winter that lies beyond
the solstice. He marches northward, overstretching his supply lines, underestimating
the natives, overextending the resources and losing all sight of home. How could
there be a return, crossing burned bridges and pawing the scorched earth for grain?
Trapped where he cannot survive it must end. Too much belief in the self and its one
way purpose. If he does now have the wit to survive, there are still ten years worth of
damage. The lotus is cut from its roots in the mud, as the spirit is cut from the flesh,
all for the greater glory, but only to wither and die. Here there will be no redemption.
201

24, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 44, Gou, Dissipation
qian gua (inverse): 23, Bo, Decomposing
jiao gua (reverse): 16, Yu, Readiness
hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 07, 04, 19, 41
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 11th Moon (Dec)
24, Notes
* 24.6 For modern examples, see either Napoleon’s winter invasion of Moscow
or Hitler’s reprise of the same stupidity. The zhi G ua, Yi, 27, Hungry Mouth,
suggests that it is blind appetite which is here overriding the sense of one’s way
back and causing inattention to supply lines. Were the symbols of this Gua more
aquatic, the authors might have used an image of a big-mouthed fish being caught
hopelessly on a hook, never to return to the water except by a long, wrong route
through the food chain.
24, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Geburah in Assiah
* Tarot: Five of Pentacles
* Astrology: Mars in Earth
24, Quotations
* All these tidal gatherings, growth and decay,
Shining and darkening, are forever
Renewed, and the whole cycle impenitently
Revolves, and all the past is future. —Robinson Jeffers
* Remain true to the earth, my brethren, with the power of your virtue ... Lead,
like me, the flown away virtue back to the earth - yea, back to the body and life ...
Physician, heal thyself!  Then wilt thou also heal thy patient. Let it be his best
cure to see with his eyes him who maketh himself whole.
—Nietzsche, TSZ  [Luke 4:23]
* Bao Jiao vaunted his conduct and condemned the world, but he suicided with
his arms around a tree. —Zhuangzi
* Every beginning is a consequence - every beginning ends something.
—Paul Valery
* The mind ought sometimes to be diverted that it may return the better to
thinking. —Phaedrus
* Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,
Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home. —John Howard Payne
202

GUA 25, WU2 WANG4, WITHOUT PRETENSE
  
 Binary 100 111 = 39; Zhen below, Qian above
25.X, Overall Image
Beneath the sky moves thunder
The creatures interact without pretensions
The early sovereigns, accordingly, flourished according to season
And nurtured the myriad beings
Heaven has given all of its orders: they come with each being. This being, in turn,
is what life has learned so far: to live and learn more, to add new perspectives and
tricks. Ancient heaven and eons of seasons are at work in the natural mind. Life true
to nature is the seed of heaven, its blessing to go forward, wild and noble, informed
by its inner wisdom and what it can learn on the way. Most of the wisdom heaven
might teach is built right into young sprouts, the rest being clockworks and natural
law. We begin with heaven’s best guesses at how things might average out, a head
start with promise, but not guarantees, not good and innocent, not sinful or fa llen.
25.0, Without Pretense
Most fulfilling
Worthwhile to persist
For one without integrity there will be suffering*
And not much reward in having somewhere to go
By right of birth comes the will and the sense to reach out for a good life. Youth errs
and stumbles, but as with young b