e, persis-
tence, endurance, mastery, genius, higher order, higher purpose, calling, vocation,
enduring activity, lasting vigor, dynamic living, dragonhood; heaven; warmth of
the sun; vigorous appearance; (a, the) male, gang or yang principle; (to ) create,
initiate, design, author, master, persist, endure (s, ed, ing); creation’s, creativity’s;
gan, (to be) dry, dried
01.T, Tuan Zhuan
How great (is) creation’s source!
The myriad beings (are) provided beginnings
Along with all of the sky
Clouds pass, rain falls
The varieties of beings flow into form
Great light completes (then) begins
The six positions (are) by season fulfilled
Seasons to mount the six dragons
(And) with these to master the skies
Creation’s way (is) emergence (and) transformation
Each being true to inner nature (and) higher law
Security (is) joining in the highest attunement
It is this that rewards persistence
(As) leaders emerge from the numberless beings
The myriad realms come together in peace
58

01.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.1: secured by metal brake, weak swine struggles)
Lurking dragon - not at all usefu l
01.1x - Lurking dragon - not at all useful:
The light remains below.
As beings from four dimensions and more, the young dragon knows things that
young humans do not. Patience and restraint, for example, while feeble as forces,
are mighty as powers, since to act at the wrong time is just as defective as acting
in wrong directions. What luck that there is so much to do before learning to fly,
so much to consider and contemplate still. Ages pass as dragon seed, ages more
as an egg, with no more to show than two meter’s height and a couple of cracks
in the shell. But one does not challenge a sky so full of stars on little pink wings.
This is not indecision. What to do is im plicit and latent. It is still the wrong place
and wrong time. To try not to be the wrong dragon is enough of an effort for now.
Who would want to be this dragon or even put him to use gets to use power to wait.
01.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.2: fellowship only inside the clan, embarrassing)
Dragon appears in the field
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being*
01.2x - Dragon appears in the field:
Merit’s reach (is) extensive
When you want to grow into adulthood, it is good to live and learn among peers.
When you want to grow to potential, it is wiser to s eek out those more advanced.
How many of these you can find will measure that potential, in degrees of humility.
With so much to learn, so much to not reinvent, and so much to unlearn only later,
all held as treasure by culture, the young dragon searches the fields of his choice,
adding horizons, models and new points of view, becoming exposed and familiar,
allotting much of that long span of years simply to learning all of the basics: of fluid
and aerodynamics, of eclectic method, of the words and deeds of ancestral dragons,
what they have done, and failed to do, having the sky for a limit. Most knowledge
will be second hand, for even the purest of selves is made of what others can offer.
59

01.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.3: one eyed see, lame take steps, and get bitten)
A noble young one,* throughout the day, creating, creating
By nightfall looking frightful
A struggle
Not an error
01.3x Throughout the day, creating, creating:
Turning (and) returning (is) the way
The young dragon ends yet another full day with long hours under the night lights,
poring over the tomes and glyphs, deciphering cryptic runes, hunting for something
greater than himself, getting to know the big limitations, feeling less than immortal,
learning the star routes by heart, forward and back, while his visions of how far there
is yet to go deepen much faster than progress he makes. The air and the aura around
this noble young one begins to crackle with essence and power. The young dragon
teases the web of the scheme of all things, testing the intricate fabric of space