bury it certain fathoms in
the  earth, and, deeper than did ever plummet sound, I’ll drown my book.
—Shakespeare, The Tempest
* They are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing.
—Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice
* All our final resolutions are made in a state of mind which is not going to last.
—Proust
* The lady doth protest too much, methinks. —Shakespeare, Hamlet
* When you come to a fork in the road, take it. —Yogi Berra
* It takes a great deal of elevation of thought to produce very little elevation of life.
—Emerson
316

GUA 44, GOU4, DISSIPATION
 
  Binary 011 111 = 31; Xun below, Qian above
44.X, Overall Image
Beneath the sky is the wind
Dissipation
Rulers, accordingly, issue commands and decrees
in all four directions
The wind blows through the trees and the forest below, while heaven sparkles above.
The random-seeming weather, while loosely observing all compulsions to order, will
muffle and baffle both the sounds and the silence, and interfere with the sky view as
both blanket and veil. By the time they have reached the ends of the earth, the king’s
clear commands are undone, and sound just like wind. Few of his orders w ill ever
arrive unaltered, articulate or enunciate as he will. And thus he turns to redundancy,
nature’s defense against chaos, but bought at the cost of precious diversity. Order,
pattern and purpose are somehow preserved. Some of this message might survive.
44.0, Chance Encounter
The woman is powerful*
Not at all useful to court this woman
The subtle advances to meet and undo the strong. The powerful woman proposing
to you has also proposed to four oth ers, turning all heads from all higher purpose.
This could bewilder your whole set of wits. If you do not want your wits wildered
you will not seek to mate with this creature. Of course she is only a symbol, of all
of those things you ought not to pair with, if you want to hold on to your purpose
in life. Entropy, too, is a kind of a power, but it’s not one with which to wax mighty.
Strength will want a stronger foundation than these light and breezy false promises.
Wizards in witchy arms are in their own element, but anyone less will be a plaything
or an experiment, with outcomes as unknown as the weather. Anything goes at night
but she will sleep all day. Luckily power is also restraint and good timing. To settle
for what seems like less must be done now or later, but now there is much more of
less to be lost, or lots more of yourself to hang onto. This is not about women and
men, although they do this so well to each other. The woman to whom a man gives
his power is also the man to whom women give up their choices: only a diversion.
317

44.M, Key Words
Interference, extenuation, attenuation, dissipation, distraction, complication, chaos
Chance encounter, casual relation, affair, fling, indiscretion, seduction, temptation
Entropy, randomness, undermining influence; squandering or adulterating order
Mental promiscuity; coincidences taken too seriously as omens; loss of judgment
Deferring, prioritizing, restraining self, abstaining; waiting for a meaningful affair
Interposition, insinuation, persuasiveness; happening upon, accidental rendezvous
44.G, From the Glossary
gou4 (to) couple, pair, connect, mate, copulate, meet (with), pair (up) with, come
in(to) contact with, come in(to) conflict with, encounter (s, ed, ing); (a, the)
(chance) encounter, (temporary) affair, (ad h oc) coalition; temptation, seduction,
dissipation
44.T, Tuan Zhuan
Dissipation
(Means) to encounter
The flexible encounters the firm
Not at all useful to court (this) woman:
Not suited to enduring together
Heaven (and) earth encounter each other
(And) the varieties of beings join in the composition
Firmness encounters (with) concentration (and) integrity
(And) all under heaven  make great advances
Chance encounter’s proper timing (is) very important here!
318

44.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.1: lurking dragon, not at all useful