eir) company
He believes in and clings to the nice and the fun. Thus he guards his innocence and
cultivates his childlike qualities in order to stay in a happier state. The elders have all
been there and done that, so long ago, and sucked all the juices out. Now theirs is a
dry, second-hand, grumpy thing. Rigorous thinking and knowhow frown too much
for his taste. Wide-eyed, but short sighted, a deficit of attention will not let him think
this all through. Distractions cannot track this thing to its end. And so he will live to
discover, in difficult ways, as much incompetence in innocence as arrogance in age.
There is a way to be both, and to have the best of both, but this lies on the far side of
adulthood, which also will need outgrowing. Neither youth nor maturity need take as
much time as allotted. But beginner’s mind is the best place to start and return to.
157

17.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.3: when the talk has circled three times, be sure)
Bound to one of maturity
Giving up the little child
Following comes to be seeking of gain
Worthwhile to abide in persistence
17.3x Bound to one of maturity:
Intending to give up the lowly
On the path we must take to maturity, the time comes to put away childish things,
such as innocence, trust, enthusiasm and wonder. To cling to the time-tested elders
means great expectations are served. Tomorrow will be set and known to the mind.
We now follow answers instead of the quest. We accomplish our tasks without so
many digressions, no questions asked. No won der we get precisely what we seek.
The larger decisions demand serious thought, although games may be played if in
earnest for serious stakes. The elder follows a path, but to do this he must miss the
field. While just off the side of the path, a little folly explores a bit over the edge,
and sometimes finds the path to be a wrong rut. To follow is to ask questions and
cherish the wisdom in being surprised. These are not lowly, or things to outgrow.
17.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
(Fan Yao 03.4: quest of marital suitor, going without doubt)
Following to achieve success
Persistence has pitfalls
Being truly on the path,
Using clarity,
Where is the error?
17.4x Following to achieve success:
This means pitfalls
* Being truly on the path,
Clarity (is) the success
Goal-oriented behavior has much to recommend it, along with some widely known
problems. There is always this advice: be careful what you ask for. And: enjoy the
journey as much as the destination. And: don’t look so far ahead that you stumble
on things at your feet. And: a confidence man looks for “enlightened” self-interest.
Then there are the troubles known to the larger followings. When a group builds up
its machinery around the pursuit of a goal and then the goal is attained, it begins to
imagine a body and soul for itself. Having started out its life as a good idea, it now
wants to live forever. So it starts giving orders and laying down rules to keep itself
conserved: be it now resolved, against all change. All of these share a solution: keep
all the goals, just make them ad hoc and provisional, and never stop looking around.
158

17.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.5: shock going and coming, but work to be done)
Trusting in excellence
Promising
17.5x Trusting in excellence (is) promising:
The position (is) correct (and) central
If there are too many choices and not enough lifetime for every digression, maybe
the best way to limit them is to set higher standards. Not higher ideals, but higher
realities. Life is not tested or greatly advanced by the easy ordeals. Great strides are
seldom taken in lockstep with others. We learn to swim best in cold water over our
heads, when we are most alive to the living yet to be done. To face greater contexts
and challenges will more likely cure us of snobbery than it will foster conceit. The
superior man is a humbler man, in spite of all he has conquered. Selection brought
this tribe far, b