eading the signs
Understanding other perspectives, a point of view of being beheld or objectified
20.G, From the Glossary
guan1 (to) attend, behold, comprehend, consider, contemplate, divine, evaluate,
examine, gaze (at, upon), gaze with concentration, look (at/for/to), observe, per-
ceive, see, study, view, watch, scry, regard (s, ed, ing); (a, the) comprehension,
observation, perception, perspective, prospect, scenery, sight, view, vista
20.T, Tuan Zhuan
The great perspective lies above
Acceptance and versatility
Balance (and) uprightness (are) used in observing all under heaven
Observing
A cleansing but not a sacrifice,
Being true is as good as dignified:
Those below observe and so (are) transformed
Observing heaven’s sacred course and the four seasons’ lack of deviation
The wise ones use (these) sacred principles to establish (their) teachings
And so all under heaven simply consent
174

20.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.1: worthwhile and productive to perform great deeds)
Childlike perspective
For little people, no blame
For the noble young one, an embarrassment
20.1x First six’s childlike perspective
(Is) the little one’s path
There is nothing really wrong with having the ears, eyes and mind of a child. Minds
grow their best developing slowly. You do have the simplified view, plenty of colors
on the surface of things and lots of details at random. You are sure of yourself and
your place at the center of things and are ready to question at least. Magic still lives.
Of course there is no penetration, no overall concert or harmony, no practical way
to apply what you see to your life. You have a deficient span of attention from only
a single perspective. Right now is the only time. Your mind alights on the surfaces,
on dazzle and glamour and show. You cannot tell the innocent from the naive. Your
mind still wants a critical mass of experience and ways to step out of itself. Those
who grow up should still want to have all this at hand. Just not as their only option.
20.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.2: hurrying to what supports one, regrets pass)
A prying perspective
Serves a young woman’s persistence
20.2x (With) prying perspective, the young woman persists:
But still invites condemnation
Contemplating the rites through a crack in the doorway, the young lady watches her
husband stepping solemnly up to the altar to begin the autumn rites. Yet all she can
manage to think of is how his clothing looks and how she wants him home soon.
If this is the limit of her domain and such a narrow, short-sighted perspective is all
she requires or wants out of life, one ought not to ask her for more. As long as the
effects of this are confined to her life, no great mistake or great anything. A princess
will need a much broader range of perspectives. Such limited views keep her stuck
in one place, with half truths and partial contexts, as less than a worthy witness. One
degree of comprehension is not all that comprehensive. A single perspective is prey
to misdirection and gossip. Gathering good intelligence is done outside of oneself.
175

20.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.3: advancing, but no return, eggs but no goslings)
Observing our own lives in advances and retreats
20.3x Observing our own lives (in) advances (and) retreats:
Still not neglecting the path
The examined life begins with rough drafts and revisions. Growing up is creation.
Who are we really, and what do we want here? With backward looks at the trends
in our lives we try to make art out of retrospect. But what sort of stuff are we truly
made up of? Disjointed events and their consequences? Are we what we have done
and not what we failed to do? Were we never what we never could do? Could we be
now what we no longer do? We sort through the trends and tangled up threads, the
clues, the moments of valor and doubt, the tests passed and failed, to fashion and test
new directions, to wrap up the past in simpler meanings a