ll:
life is many-dimensioned. And she does not purposely cripple herself to attain this.
54.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.2: countless losses, up 9 hills, chase wastes 7 days)
The one-eyed can still see
Warranting the secluded one’s persistence
54.2x Warranting the secluded one’s persistence:
Not yet ready to vary the rules
Even a one-eyed man can see right through little sister. Without the eye for depth,
he still sees shallowness well and does not get excited. He’s had enough bad luck
and with only one eye remaining, he is in no rush to risk what remains of his vision
and hopes. Now he is more than doubly wary of further risky adventures. Without
his age and sound judgment he might have leapt at this, getting pulled or seducted
along. Today, he still wants a partner, a new point of view and a second opinion, and
he still wants the flow, just not down the drain. His next one won’t be ill-considered.
Such a caution will refute joy whenever it can, with or without hope of failure, until
it cannot be refuted. This is just how it must be now, a caution out of proportion to
prospect and not the brightest of futures. Little sister is also be tter off elsewhere.
379

54.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 34.3: nets, not force, goat butting hedge gets stuck)
Little sister marries as a bondmaid
Then comes back to marry as second wife
54.3x Little sister marries as a bondmaid:
Still not satisfactory
Poor little sister spies her great chance in the person of dashing prince charming.
This one has every trait that she wants in a man: he is tall, attractive and wealthy.  
Not once did she think to look for honest or kind, so instead she finds herself sold
into slavery. She gets out of this misadventure and she bounces right back as a cool
concubine. From the worst to second to worst: only for slaves is this upwards. Still
she thinks she is still on her way to the top. But every year means a little more paint,
more money for clothes and a t rinket or two. Just a few more lessons in judgment
and she might even find that simpler home she was offered so long ago. Her race to
the top is with wrinkles and sags, and the only time that she has. So this one is not
a pursuit she is likely to win. Why would her happiness even need such pursuing?
54.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.4: complete commitment, without mistakes)
Little sister’s marriage is delayed beyond the allotted term
A later marriage becomes timely
54.4x Exceeding the allotted term has its purpose
There will be a delay and then progress
Little sister's betrothal does not much excite her. At least this is how it may seem.
If this is her only reward, maybe she needs to work on her merit some more. She
postpones the day to the limits of social endurance. She burns her strange candles
at midnight, and marks up the floor with circles and runes. She arranges a handful
of risky encounters between her betrothed and nubile, young maidens. Her dowry
becomes a bride price. Her chances to screw things up are rapidly passing her by.
She could pick her nose in public. She’s tried everything except saying no, which
might show some wisdom. If this engagement outlives her trials, it is nothing less
than pure fate. Then she can get on with her life, resigned to a well-tested destiny.
Let’s hope that she does not drive him insane, then accuse him of being irrational.
380

54.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.5: trusting in the unsustainable holds struggles)
When Lord Yi gave his maiden daughter in marriage
This noble woman’s gown was not equal
to her bridesmaids’ gowns in fineness
The moon approaching fullness
Is hopeful
54.5x When Lord Yi gave (his) maiden daughter in marriage
There was no equal to her bridesmaids’ gowns (in) fineness
* Her place was in the center,
In order to honor the journey
The king’s maiden daughter cannot help but wed a man from a lower station in life.
How easy it would be here to have the perfect