ht track, while as prey it is nothing
but trouble. There are right and wrong ways to follow, but not the way most think.
Those who believe first and then follow have basic things confused. They follow the
song and dance of another, thus half a step out of time. Or they follow promotional
schemes. And confidence games. And the shepherd, fearing his censure. And the
fisherman with his bait. All bait, in fact, is named happiness by the one who sets the
trap. Now take a look at the king: as leader he’s more of a servant than the one who
washes his master’s feet. Is he less of a king when he follows? He conquers at his
best when obeying the natural law. He follows to know how time moves, submitting
in order to rule, attending the world’s rhythms, following hints and trails and clues,
following up and through. The things which are greater than we are, but still outside
of ourselves, can still show or teach us our own true paths. But we cannot follow
nearly as well when grovelling down on our knees, or unable to question or think.
155

17.M, Key Words
Quest, search, pursuit, seeking; incentives, attraction, allure, affinity, tugging, bait
Draw, pull, persuasion, compliance; consequent, consequence; adapting as fitness
To go along with, find the rhythm of, taking a pulse; follow up & follow through
Allegiances, loyalties; subordinating, adherence, obedience, consent, submission
Guidance, orientation; succeeding, succession; magnetic center, ethical compass
Opportunism in taking guidance, advice & direction; follow as tracking & hunting
17.G, From the Glossary
sui2 (to) follow (up, through); succeed, trail, go along, fall in with, wait on, com-
ply, accord, let, allow, adopt, adapt, conform, respond (in, with, to); lag behind,
accompany, imitate, look like, resemble, carry out, pursue, chase, go after, come
after (s, ed, ing); (to be) followed by, successive, succeeding, consecutive, sub-
sequent; pursued, chased; (a, the) consequence, succession, pursuit, company,
success, response; obsequiousness; subsequently, afterward(s), next, then, at once,
presently, instantly, forthwith, right behind, in due course, in the course of time,
accordingly, according to
17.T, Tuan Zhuan
Following
The firm comes forward and submits to the flexible
Movement and satisfaction (in) following
Great fulfillment, to be dedicated (is) not a mistake:
And all under heaven follow the seasons
Following the time has a meaning (of) great importance here!
156

17.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.1: being true is no end, take hand, do not worry)
Standards will change
Persistence is promising
Leaving the gate to interact has merit
17.1x Standards will change:
To follow the true (is) promising
* Leaving the gate to interact has merit:
Nothing (is) lost
Some believers believe that paradise is a walled-in garden of truth, a windowless
monad, without any windows to let in bad news, or doors to admit any makers of
mischief. They feel secluded, safe and secure behind the things that they are told.
The news and the current events, the rhythm of the world outside the walls, are fogs
and ephemera in the glare of eternal and unchanging truths. It may be true that the
classics and standards change more slowly than fashion. Some laws might live for
centuries, some dharmas, thousands of years. But even these adapt to new cultures
and times. Who makes up these strange ideas, and why do people embrace them?
What makes change so distasteful to insecure people? Why not tell them stories
for grownups? Paradise is big and round. And you stand exposed on the outside.
17.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.2: trusting joy, promising, regrets pass)
Bound to the little child
Giving up one of maturity
17.2x Bound to the little child:
As opposed to joining (their) company
He believes in and clings to the nice and the fun. Thus he guards his innocence and
cultivates his childlike qualities in order to stay in a happier state. The elders have all
been there