e (Xiao Gua, Introduction to Scales). In this Scale, an
equally weighted or valued intermediate is placed in between two other, contrasting forces.
The border between Earth below and Heaven above is Humanity’s domain. This is the
fertile place, and we share this with the Wan W u, the Myriad Beings or Ten Thousand
Things. Heaven begins at our feet, even when we stand in pits. The Earth ends at the tops of
our heads, even when we stand on mountains. So we have some room to move about in.
This Scale of Three is often taken by westerners to be a metaphysics about the 
human
integration of divine form with material substance, but the Chinese do not think this way
until they are “sa ved” by the western missionaries. Heaven does suggest a moral and
conscious order. And Earth, as substance, suggests an ability to learn, develop and, at last, to
return. Heaven is the realm of day and night, sun and moon, Humanity is the realm of
movement and stillness, Earth is the realm of hardness and softness, dryness and moisture.
Heaven is mental, Humanity is social, and Earth is natural, but not inert.
Da Ba Gua  or Great Trigrams are formed when Tai Yin  and Tai Yang Si Xiang
occupy the three two-line pairs (1-2, 3-4 & 5-6) of Gua places (see Fig. 13).
24

The Yao Wei or Line Positions
The Liu Yao Wei or Six Changing Line Positions are an evolving dimension. While
there is no explicit definition of individual Line meanings or associations in the Zhouyi
itself, even the crudest  of word frequency counts wi ll demonstrate the priority of this
dimension: heads are not seen in Line One, feet are not seen in Line Six. The Zhouyi text
embodies several sets of associations to the Six Line Places. Chief among these is the Gua
as a map of the Time, from the first stages at the Bottom to the outcome (or past it) at the
Top. The body is used frequently as an analogy, so too are familial, social, class and
political structures. And each of these sets carries its own set of implications into Line
interpretation. A number of these are offered under the scoping of individual Line meanings
below.
The Wen Yan Zhuan, Wing 7, in a discussion of Qian, the first Gua  (text “d” ),
says: liu yao fa hui, pang tong qing : The Six Changing Lines express a distribution: of
facets (sides or aspects) to communicate tendencies (inclinations or movements). The Xi Ci
Zhuan, in Wing 6, Section II.9, elaborates:
   Yi zhi wei shu: Yuan shi, yao zhong, yi wei zhi. Liu yao xiang za, wei qi shi wu. Qi c hu
nan zhi, qi shang yi zhi: ben mo. Chu ci ni zhi, zu cheng zhi zhong. Ruo fu za wu zhuan de,
bian shi yu fei. Ze fei q i zhong yao bu bei. Yi: yi yao cun wang, ji xiong, ze chu k e zhi y i.
Zhi zhe, guan qi xiang ci, ze si, guo ban yi. Er yu si, tong gong er y i wei;
 qi shan bu tong.
Er duo yu; si duo ju- jin. Rou zhi wei dao, bu l i yuan zhe: q i yao wu jiu; qi yong r ou
zhong. San yu wu, tong gong er yi wei; san duo xiong; wu duo gong. Gui jian zhi deng. Qi
rou wei, qi gang sheng xie (punctuation added): (How) the Changes come to work through
the book: Sources and beginnings, necessities and conclusions, (are) used as (the) working
material. The six changing lines intertwine with each other, (and) answer to one’s timing
and circumstances. The first line is difficult to know, the top line is easy to know: (these are)
the roots and branch tips. The first line expresses the intent of it, the last follows through
and comes to conclusions. It seems that a diversity of circumstances compose the character,
the discrimination of right in relation to wrong. The pattern would not be (complete) (were)
the middle lines n ot provided for. So: to further address retaining and letting go, the
promising and the unfortunate, patterns of life’s course may be comprehended here. To
grasp this, studying these diagrams and texts, patterns and thoughts, (is) more than halfway
done. Line two (is) related to line four, similar in merit but different in position; their skills
are not the same. Line two