n’t
always look where he’s going. Some sort of goal is expected of movement, even  the
moves of pure wisdom. Wits are better collected around something that’s up ahead.
It’s always best to give something in order to merit reward, even if only a thank you.
325

45.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.3: persuaded in loins, managing consequences)
It seems that to congregate is the same as complaining
Not a direction with merit
To continue thus is not harmful
But a little embarrassing
45.3x To continue( thus) is not harmful:
The superior (is) adaptable
How could they gather without him? He has grievances to share. He needs friends.
Maybe he seeks to join the wrong congregation. He cannot stimulate enough pity.
At some lesser sorts of gatherings, the people can huddle together and yet become
even less than they were. An association of victims of this or that thing might serve
some transient purpose, but membership here should be temporary, with programs
for going beyond. Commisery does love its company, and will happily enroll you,
long term, in the woe-is-us healing process. But where the group is healthy, it might
be looking for members with something better to offer. Why would they desire to
open their gates to the whiners? The loud, plaintive sighs are disturbing the speaker.
He’ll need to meet them halfway, by composing himself into someone they want.
45.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.4: outwardly joining, commitment promising)
A lot of promise
Avoid mistakes
45.4x A lot of promise, (but) avoid mistakes:
The position is not appropriate
This congregation offers it all: a security of the spirit and a fellowship of the saved,
with almost no work, at only a moderate cost, plus many convenient payment plans.
The priest occupies an attractive position, assembling others on another’s behalf.
He needs not even be wise, as long as he follows the program. The miracles were
done long ago. Today he can give them water and tell them that it is wine, or he can
give them wine and tell them that it is blood. And these people really believe him.
If he tried this at his own affair they would not respect him so much. They do not
want him to try to be just himself. In the temple things are different, they come to
be fooled, and not without reason. There is a point to which this serves a purpose.
Sheep should not try to think. For others, an end to the fear is courage to question.
326

45.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.5: persistent affliction, chronic but not fatal)
Convening presumes a position
This is not wrong
But an absence of trust
Means extremely prolonged persistence
Regrets pass
45.5x Convening presumes a position:
The objectives (are) still not conspicuous
Somebody needs to bring this convention to order. Everyone looks to the podium,
most with high expectations. But in between now and the time the audience leaves,
there should be one to step up and fill this position. The speakers have a head start:
the benefit of assumptions that one who has nothing to say worth hearing will not
be invited to speak. The place itself brings them this far, past more than half of their
reasons to fear and doubt. The minister has only to pull the rest of himself together,
his notes, his wits, his courage and self-esteem, and then simply find a trust or faith
in a system set up to do this. You can’t take trust out of this picture. Until the audio
program begins there is no audience yet. How great must this sacrifice be? It may be
safe to assume he can trade his fears and his doubts for equal amounts of success.
45.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.6: overcoming separation, denial, then rejoicing)
Offering counsel while weeping and sniveling
But no harm is done
45.6x Offering counsel (while) weeping (and) sniveling:
Less than secure at the top
Maybe something went wrong at the gathering. Perhaps he tripped on his tongue,
or maybe they laughed at his sacrifice. Whatever it was that he gave up ha