ted to being accessed by Yarrow stalks.
For one more side-bar before returning to the next school: the Li J i, or the
(Confucian) Book of Rites was compiled in the first century BCE by Dai Sheng. In
a comparison of temperaments and types of the readers of the various classics,
students of the Yi are called “pure and calm, refined and subtle.” The Huainanzi,
written by various authors some time prior to 122 BCE, mentions the traits of
“clear-sightedness and logical comprehension.” And it also notes that when the
Yi is abused, demons appear. So feel good about yourself, but watch out.
Not every scholar in the Early Han partook in the speculative endeavors of
the Xiang Shu Jia. Among the early holdouts who rejected the Apocrypha and
the intrusion of the Yin-Yang doctrines were Kong Anguo (156-74), Mao Heng
and his son, Mao Chang (2nd cent.) and Wang Huang (late 1st cent.). During this
period a number of texts which had been hidden from the F ires of Qin, and the
threat of its repetition, resurfaced. These were written in the pre-Qin script. They
also may have included a large number of forgeries, pseudepigrapha and hasty
reconstructions from oral tradition and memory. While the Xiang Shu Jia  was to
continue to dominate until the 2nd century CE, reaching its prime in the 1st
century CE), a growing number of scholars turned to these (largely) older versions
of the classics for study. This trend was known as the Guwen Jia, or the Old Text
School, and its study, as the Gu Xue, or the Ol d Learning. Among its progenitors
were Yang Xiong (53 BCE - 18 CE) and Wang Chong (27-100). The former sought
a return to a purer Confucianism, while the latter, an eclectic ( Za Jia) began to use
philosophical Daoist naturalism to undermine the Xiang S hu speculation, and in
the process began to bring aspects of Daoism into mainstream thought. Although
there was a general denouncement of wild prognostication, the Ten Wings of the
Yi were by now considered a part of the Old Text, and so many of these Guwen
scholars kept a pet, or favorite, structural dimension from either the Wings or the
Xiang S hu. For example, Fei Zhi (50 BCE - 10 CE) retained the Hu Ti, or Nuclear
Trigrams (and many others, including Gua Q i). Liu Xin (46 BCE - 23 CE), the
librarian whose father Liu Xiang (79-8) had been so instrumental in collecting lost
books under Cheng Di, retained a fondness for the pitch pipe associations. Yang
Xiong, above, in his Tai Xuan, the Great Mystery, developed the Si Xiang  (the
Four Emblems) in some detail. The Yao D e and Yao W ei (the Changing Line
Characteristics and Positions) were picked up by both schools.
By the second and third centuries CE, Daoism had divided into its two main
branches, religious and philosophical. Each, separately, was to play a major part in
the next Yixue era. The first group had begun to take its form long before, in the
521

third century BCE. Its members were known as the adepts, the Fang S hi, or the
Masters of Prescriptions. This term w ould also translate well as Medicine Men,
except that women were involved as well. This tradition was also rooted in the
ancient shamanic traditions of China, with the Wan Nian Zhi  (or Ling Zhi ) and
the Wan Nian Hama  medicines. The Yinyang J ia was incorporated as well. Zou
Yan was credited as the father of Daoist alchemy, even though this alchemy is not
known to have been practiced prior to 133 BCE. Naturally, Laozi and Zhuangzi
were among the immortal founders. This tradition was largely secretive, esoteric
and underground, but it would surface now and then. A few times Fang Shi came
out to make expeditions, on a sovereign’s behalf, to search for the Ling Zhi  on
some distant island. This treasure was the magic herb which makes one immortal.
They never bothered to inform their patrons that the Ling Zhi  could be found in
half of the places where cows had been, growing right out of the pies. This tactic
backfired now and then, in the Qin dynasty especially, when a number of Fa