not the end. Fan Yao 03.3 also speaks to the subject of competence gained
from experience.
* 63.5 This line is inconsistent with a theory we sometimes hear professed that
private sacrifice was prohibited in the Early Zhou.
63, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Tipareth in Briah
* Tarot: Six of Cups
* Astrology: Sol in Water
63, Quotations
* Two dangers constantly threaten the world: order and disorder. —Paul Valery
* Of what small spots pure white complains. —John Donne
* A finished product is one that has already seen its better days. —Art Linkletter
* The real problem is what to do with the problem solvers after the problems are
solved. —Gay Talese
* Useless is a wonderful milk yield from a cow that kicks the pail over.
—Chisti, quoted by Idries Shah
* One does not get over a passion by representing it. Rather, it is over when one is
able to represent it. —Nietzsche, WTP
* when man determined to destroy  /  himself he picked the was
of shall and finding only why  / smashed it into because —e.e. cummings
* A thing is complete when you can let it be. —Gita Bellin
* Existence really is an imperfect tense that never becomes a present.
—Nietzsche
* Try as hard as we may for perfection, the net result of our labors is an amazing
variety of imperfectness. We are surprised at our own versatility in being able to
fail in so many different ways. —Samuel McChord Crothers
436

GUA 64, WEI4 JI4, NOT YET COMPLETE
 
  Binary 010 101 = 21 (1/3); Kan below, Li above
64.X, Overall Image
The flame is positioned on top of the water
Not yet complete
The noble young one, accordingly, is heedful and discerning
so that things remain straightforward
Flame over water is clearly misplaced, completely out of its element. The young fox
crossing thin ice, like the albatross over mid-ocean, must keep his longer-term goals
on his mind, attending to details, with sharp eyes for problems and needs, digressing
only to further the purpose of crossing. To see the big picture here includes lots of
irrelevant things. Seeing only what matters the most requires a distorted perspective.
The wise take great care with distinctions, so that each thing finds its right place and
footing stays sure. A useful tension exists here between what could be and what is,
an energy potential. Things out of their proper places draw themselves homeward.
64.0, Not Yet Complete
Fulfillment
The little fox is almost across the half-frozen stream
To soak that tail
Is not a direction with merit
Nearly halfway across the half-frozen stream, the wary, young fox is dauntless, but
careful. He is also not done growing older and wiser, and knows this. He continues
to follow his plan. His plan, however, has already crossed, and now relaxes on that
far shore in the sun. Such a plan can drown itself many times over, yet come back as
lively as ever. The tangible fox is unable to do this and so he wants to keep all of his
trouble in theory, and to keep his loose ends together. This far from safety, with just
as far forward as back, he cannot afford even to dampen his tail. His nearest home
or resting place may be all the way at the end. Nothing is granted but givens, as he
can find and claim them. The sequences are uncertain, the problems are unknown.
And yet he wants certain, not probable, outcomes. Thankfully, only three out of four
feet really need to be sure. Thinking on and with his feet, he tests the ice before he
commits his weight, keeping three points on the known and one for new knowledge.
Almost all of this tension and stress increases his chance of success. Thoughts of
ice cold water, thoughts of the warm, sunny shore: a tension pulls one to the other.
437

64.M, Key Words
Suspense, state of transition, unfinished business, halfway across, states of change
Uncertainty; sustaining purpose and effort, second wind, subordination to the goal
Tension between what is and what must be, elasticity, necessity as a motivation
Dynamic disequilibrium, the energy of displacement, provisional ends and means
Actuali