lts: fickle heart)
A team of four horses arrayed alike
Tears of blood, flowing like water
03.6x Tears of blood, flowing like water:
How could this be continued?
The courtship goes terribly wrong: all of his glory proves to be not good enough.
He broadcasts the loss of his mind now, each false hope cries out as it dies. This is,
of course, the end of the world, tomorrow will not come around any more. Pain is
now always, and happiness never. He is now lost - a loser, a failure, selected against
and denied. But perhaps he was merely too full of himself, with too much expected,
too little attended, and all of this leaking of his is just a way to leak out of an outlet,
and what he has is more than he needs, and not less than he needs at all. Why make
a little misfortune enormous? Why this much mourning for something now known
to have had no real chance? Why make the short road endless? A problem of simple
proportion. Things begin great as illusions, but the real begins and ends uninflated.
75

03, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 50, Ding, The Cauldron
qian gua (inverse): 04, Meng, Inexperience
jiao gua (reverse): 40, Jie, Release
hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
03, Notes
* 03.2 Titus Yu, quite literally, has "not outlaws but inlaws."
* 03.2 There was a custom I may not be capturing here. A poor groom could help
a bride’s family save face by feigning the abduction of a bride. I am not certain,
but these could be the robbers suggested here. At the least, the practice may have
made it easy within the culture to confuse or associate the suitor with the robber.
* 03.3 Yu2 has several appropriate translations (all of them intended: preparation,
readiness, precaution; foresight, forethought; concern, worry; and forester, game
warden, etc) which cannot be rendered by a single English word.
03, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Geburah in Briah
* Tarot: Five of Cups
* Astrology: Mars in Water
03, Quotations
* Character consists in what you do on the third and fourth tries.
—James Michener
* We will now discuss in a little more detail the Struggle for Existence.
—Charles Darwin
* Let the end try the man. —Shakespeare, Henry IV
* It is in self-limitation that a master first shows himself. —Goethe
* Necessity does the work of courage. —George Eliot (Marian Evans)
* In the difficult are the friendly forces, the hands that work on us. —Rilke
* Great perils have this beauty, that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers.
—Victor Hugo
* Every man expects somebody or something to help him. And when he finds that
he must help himself, he says he lacks liberty and justice. —Edgar Watson Howe
* Trials teach us what we are. —Charles Spurgeon
* In critical moments even the very powerful have need of the weakest. —Aesop
76

GUA 04, MENG2, INEXPERIENCE
 
  Binary 010 001 = 17; Kan below, Gen above
04.X, Overall Image
At the foot of the mountain emerges a spring
Inexperience
The noble young one, accordingly, proceeds to fruition
by nourishing character
They gurgle and burble and babble at first. In time the small pits and pools will fill,
questions are answered and needs are met. The fulfillment of first things comes first,
and each new rim is a threshold, and then a moving on, over those mocking depths,
under those frowning heights. The spring and the springtime of life is the watershed,
the headwaters of a being. It is still too far away to begin to search for great streams,
but not too far away to learn how to think of searching. The things that are lacking,
the gaps in the understanding, the unmet primary needs, the why’s and why not’s,
are what appetites are for. It’s the hunger, not the meal, that moves the youth along.
04.0, Inexperience
Fulfillment
It is not I who seeks the young and inexperienced
The young and inexperienced seek me
The first consultation informs
The second and third show disrespect
Disrespect deserves no information
It is worthwhile to be dedicated
It is not the duty or function of o