enjoy our own. Liberty
helps us evolve as well. When the hundred flowers cannot contend in the garden,
the struggle for existence no longer has selection to show which weeds are worthy.
35.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.4: stripping the bed for its flesh, ominous)
Advancing like a squirrelly rodent
Persistence is dangerous
35.4x The squirrelly rodent’s persistence (is) dangerous:
The position is not appropriate
At night, in the dumps, he is king, but this time he goes too far. He is found out by
the dawn and the daylight, in flagrante delicto, sneaking around on the palace lawn,
disclosed and exposed to the public, barely a squeak ahead of the royal gardener’s
shovel. He’ll be lucky to keep his ratty old tail. The rodents, of course, have their
places, and specific kinds of wits evolved to go with it. But clever, stealthy, nosey,
skulking and sly sorts of wits have no advantage, or less, in this bright light of day.
And all that you’ll need to trap them is to understand what they crave. Self-interest
is not their problem, only the unenlightened self-interest. He is stealing the things
that he has today for the asking, just like a thief at a potlatch. Openness, light and
fresh air restore the general welfare today. Good health is the parasite’s downfall.266

35.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.5: easing separation, promise: this passes, that passes)
Regrets pass
Loss and gain are not to be taken to heart
Simply to go is promising
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
35.5x Loss (and) gain (are) not to be taken to heart:
(Simply) to go will be rewarding
Ebbs and flows, losses and gains, night’s re-radiation of heat and day’s solar gain:
all of these are just properties of their systems. The system is the thing that remains.
This means that one best adapts to the mean and the average conditions, not the most
glorious ones. The entity which conditions itself to thrive on growth only is asking
for death or extinction in any finite system. The one which lives inside its means will
only require the average of losses and gains to get by. Then it is patient during the
losing and grateful during the gaining. Look at one country which conquers another
and then regards the plundered resources as income rather than capital. It can only
fool itself for a time. Success and failure both teach. Living to learn might make its
progress with either. Anything extra is blessing and anything less is a good appetite.
35.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.6: blind readiness, assume setbacks, avoid errors)
Advancing those antlers
Limit the practice to discipline of the home town
That harshness is timely
Is not to be blamed
But to persist is a disgrace
35.6x Limit (this) practice to subordinating the home town:
(This) course (is) less than enlightened
They are not yet exercising their freedoms in the way the herd’s leader approves of.
He has given them their encouragements, to let conscience choose and consequence
teach. He expected this to result in some kind of natural order. But what he’s so far
denied them is the twenty full years that this will require to begin to show its value.
Social climates like the general welfare or the public trust are as ecological systems.
They take time to find the steadier states and integrate in their diversity. The show of
horns comes too soon. He can save wear and tear on his great rack of antlers and act
like someone worth looking up to, instead of a buck in a rut. To micromanage this
thing is a setback, not progress. Benevolent rule becomes self-rule first. A discipline
wants good disciples. A happy, self-possessed herd will make a lot more progress.
267

35, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 05, Xu, Anticipation
qian gua (inverse): 36, Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
jiao gua (reverse): 36, Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
35, Notes
* 35.X The invisible hand image comes from Adam Smith’s Wealth o