Despite the sundry magical elements in
the Nacirema approach to physical ills, it would be a mistake to assume t hese
people are “magic-ridden.” It is principally in the area of sickness and death,
where science and rationalism have yet to provide assurance, that the Nacirema
turn to the supernatural; in their mundane affairs magic and ritual are less
important.
The anthropologist has become so fam iliar with the diversity of ways in
which different peoples behave in similar situations that he is not apt to be
surprised by even the most exotic customs. In fact, if all of the logically possible
combinations of behavior have not been found somewhere in the 
world, he is apt
544

to suspect that they must be present in some as yet undescribed tribe. This point
has, in fact, been described with respect to clan organization by Murdock. In this
light the magical beliefs and practices of the Nacirema present such unusual
aspects that it seems desirable to describe them as an example of the extremes to
which human behavior can go.
Professor Linton first brought the ritual of the Nacerima to the attention of
anthropologists twenty years ago, but the culture of these people is still very
poorly understood. They are a North American group living in the territory
between the Canadian Cree, the Yaqui and Tarahumare of Mexico, and the Carib
and Arawak of the An tilles. Little is known of their origin, although tradition
states that they came from the east. According to Nacerima mythology, their
nation was originated by a culture hero, Notgnihsaw, who is otherwise known for
two great feats of strength- the throwing of a piece of Wampum across the river
Pa-To-Mac and the chopping down of a cherry tree in which the Spirit of Truth
resided.
Nacerima culture is characterized by a highly developed market economy
which has evolved in a rich natural habitat. W hile much of the people’s time is
devoted to economic pursuits, a large part of the fruits of these labors and a
considerable portion of the day are spent in ritual activity. The focus of this
activity is the human body, the appearance and health of which loom as a
dominant concern in the ethos of the people. W hile such a concern is certainly
not unusual, its ceremonial aspects and associated philosophy are unique.
The fundamental belief underlying the whole system appears to be that the
human body is ugly and that its natural tendency is to debility and disease.
Incarcerated in such a body, man’s only hope is to avert these characteristics
through the use o
f the powerful influences of ritual and ceremony. Every
household has one or more shrines devoted to this purpose. The more powerful
individuals in the society have several shrines in their houses and, in fact, the
opulence of a house is often referred to in terms of the number of such ritual
centers it possesses. Most houses are of wattle and daub construction, but the
shrine rooms of the more wealthy are lined with stone. Powerful families imitate
the rich by applying pottery plaques to their shrine walls.
While each family has at least one such shrine, the rituals associated with it
are not family ceremonies but are private and secret. The rites are normally only
discussed with children, and then only during the period when they are being
initiated into these mysteries. I was able, however, to establish sufficient rapport
with the natives to examine these shrines and to have the rituals described to me.
The focal point of the shrine is a box or chest which is built into the wall.
In this chest are kept the many charms and magical potions without which no
native believes he could live. These preparations are secured from a variety of
specialized practitioners. The most powerful of these are the medicine men, whose
assistance must be rewarded with substantial gifts. However, the medicine men do
not provide the curative potions for their clients, but decide what the ingredients
should be and then write them down in an ancient and secret