sterner, more urgent advice, rather than simple
predictions of doom. It is claimed frequently in the Wings, especially in the Xiao Xiang, that
propitiousness is due to other Yao De  (Line Character) dimensions, particularly of Dang,
Appropriateness, and Zheng, Correctness, but I doubt seriously that a thorough statistical
analysis would bear this out. This is not to say that these Yao De  dimensions did n
ot
provide frequent and sometimes good excuses for apt comments.
Below are some of the meanings which the Six Line Positions either began with or
acquired in later analysis. The associations are general, and many are not supported by
actual words and references within the Zhouyi text. The effects of multiple dimensions and
extended metaphors make these approximate.
26

The Time Of:
Line 6: Outcome, Transcendence, Excesses, Retirement, Anticlimax, Denouement
Line 5: Manifestation, Mastery, Control, Authority, Achievement, Finesse, Optima
Line 4: Practice, Execution, Establishment, Advance with Purpose, Maneuvering
Line 3: Immersion, Exposure, Risk, Thorny Details, Transition, Insecurity, Focus
Line 2: Internal Development, Scoping, Grouping, Preparation, Small Advances
Line 1: Entrance, Beginnings, Potential, Impressions, Explorations, Tentativeness
Parts of the Body: (There are some exceptions to these)
Line 6: Head, Ears, Crown, Topknot, Tongue, Jowls, Horns
Line 5: Shoulders, Neck, Arms, Jawbones
Line 4: Trunk, Torso, Heart, Belly, Abdomen
Line 3: Thighs, Hips, Loins, Waist, Rump
Line 2: Calves, Legs, Knees
Line 1: Feet, Toes, Sandals; Hooves, Tail; Ground, Grass, Roots
People and Positions: (Many exceptions. Wife does not occur at Lines 1, 4 & 6)
Line 6: Sage, Climber, Refugee, Retiree, Extremist, Diehard, Elder, Advisor
Line 5: Sovereign, Authority, Executor, Leader, Husband, Father; Man at Work
Line 4: Chief or Sovereign’s Minister, Officer, Duke, Son, Empowered Delegate
Line 3: Lower Official, Subordinate, Subject, Worker, Journeyman, Local Leader
Line 2: Assistant, Subordinate, Servant, Mother, Maiden, Woman in the Home
Line 1: Newcomer, Apprentice, Innocent, Youth (Lines 1, 2 &3); Common People
Situations and Suggested Approaches:
Line 6: The best time to know when to stop, reflect, wrap up, integrate and enjoy. An 
obsession, compulsion, or even too much momentum, can be embarrassing.
Line 5: The time bears its fruit. Subsequent decay is still not apparent. A time for the 
moderation and balance suited to mastery and nobility. The merit shows.
Line 4: A time of familiarity, if not mastery. Niches are occupied, if not adapted to. Effects 
of diligence, reliability, talent, skill and effectiveness begin to appear.
Line 3: A time of complexity, details and many responsibilities. Little mastery of the 
environment yet. Getting a grip or finding the right quantum of boldness.
Line 2: A time for Zhen: persistence, commitment, loyalty, focus or thoroughness. 
Situations broaden, some limits are learned, skills and resources are called on.
Line 1: Seeds are planted, embryos grow. Premature action presents problems. A time to 
prepare the basics and learn: there are many unknowns. Care needed.
Places in the Four Ba Gua: (Note the relative complexity of the middle Lines)
Line 6: Top of Upper Trigram
Line 5: Center of Upper Trigram, Top of Upper Hu Ti
Line 4: Bottom of Upper Trigram, Center of Upper Hu Ti, Top of Lower Hu Ti
Line 3: Top of Lower Trigram, Bottom of Upper Hu Ti, Center of Lower Hu Ti
Line 2: Center of Lower Trigram, Bottom of Lower Hu Ti
Line 1: Bottom of Lower Trigram
Binary Value if Gang:  1=2
5=32; 2=2 4=16; 3=2 3=8; 4=22=4; 5=21=2; 6=20=1
27

The Yao De or Line Characteristics
The term Yao De refers to a set of interrelationships of individual Lines both to their
Places and to other Lines. All, except for Ruling Lines, are geometrically expressible on the
Xian Tian Ba Gong grid. As with the Yao Wei, there is no explicit reference to the Yao De
set of dimensions in the Zhouyi text. But, unlike Line Positions,