in
Promising
06.4x Returning to take up a higher purpose
Withdrawing to secure the certain:
This is not failure
Imagine that our life is a maze with walls only one meter high, and everyone thinks
that the rule is to crawl through this on your belly. And the one who stands tall and
looks over the walls is a cheat and a quitter. Most life has its multiple levels like this.
The fighting goes on in the trenches and the peace is made up above. The problem
itself can be changed by changing its frame of reference, by letting in more options
from the other parts of the world. Problems are not best solved on the level where
they begin; solutions are often just one level up. To liberate mind from the known
is not to go floating away from the real, to change the mind is easier than to change
the rest of the world, and to change the game itself will break only one set of rules.
Conflict dignifies things that need not even be. Higher purpose plays from above.
92

06.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.5: persist despite regrets, noble one has examples)
The contest is most promising
06.5x The contest (is) most promising:
Make use of the balance correctly*
Being true and sincere but still opposed. Maybe this is the right time for a contest,
or conflict, to take a stand and assert what is right, or even simply to demonstrate
who is the best. Beware of the warrior who knows that today is a good day to die.
But the oddest things sometimes happen with one who is right and true, or is truly
the best. They might find themselves outside of themselves in the contest, in some
zone with the flow, walking the shining path, occupying the center around which
opposing forces compete. It is like they have entered the problem at its moment of
resolution, and all of the puzzle’s pieces are found and sit right side up. This is not
done from way down inside of one’s purpose. When opponents are ready to fall
they get help, those who are ready to self-destruct are assisted and everyone wins.
06.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.6: oppressed by creepers, have regrets and move on)
If somehow one is awarded the leather belt and ribbons
By the end of the morning they will be three times stripped away
06.6x Using contention to be subjected to burdens:
Truly not a basis for honor
Does this mean that one should renounce competition? Or that all triumph is empty?
Or that victory carries no meaning? If this is only a game, then the morning’s six
contests still have great value. If this is mistaken for what is real and true, there is
not only no net achievement, one is also six tests more exhausted. Conflict will take
things out of proportion on purpose, but it ends by leaving them where they belong.
It is when one thinks this important that even the winners will lose. The winner here
is awarded six fine challenges, and honored with partners able to vie for top places.
Character builds, to use in retirement later. And while there is no end to the wheel,
there are the rewards, and the best may get to be put out to stud. It does not all need
to sum down  to zero. Simply decide if you want this, or find something better to do.
93

06, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 36, Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
qian gua (inverse): 05, Xu, Anticipation
jiao gua (reverse): 05, Xu, Anticipation
hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
06, Notes
* 06.5x A common interpretation of this line suggests that the subject has jumped
from a position as combatant or plaintiff to that of judge, mediator or arbiter. This
does not seem to be justified by the Zhouyi text, but rather seems to be extrapolation
or inference from the Xiao Xiang combined with Wang Bi’s notes. I think that the
subject is still a participant in the conflict or contest, but that mastery requires fin-
ding the middle way. A few of the images used in the commentary derive from the
martial art known as Aikido.
06, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yesod in Y