trons that the Ling Zhi  could be found in
half of the places where cows had been, growing right out of the pies. This tactic
backfired now and then, in the Qin dynasty especially, when a number of Fang
Shi were executed. They would also surface occasionally to make a mark on Yi
studies, notably by Wei Boyang (fl. 142-167) with the Zhouyi Cantonqi, and Yu
Fan (164-233) with the Yushi y i hou and Yushi yi han . Generally, the confusing
terminology they used in their practices, especially that of alchemy, was obscure
for the usual five reasons: mystique culti vated for the sake of business; keeping
the uninitiated amateurs away; keeping the uninitiated amateurs from the risk of
serious psychosis; having to invent terms for pr ocesses for which they had no
ready-made words; and lastly, the reasonable fear of persecution. The objectives
were ultimately the same as those of its cousin and partial descendant, western
Alchemy: turning lead into gold, or one’s own leadenness into sunlight. However,
the quest for immortality, taken literally, was much stronger in China, even after
the exoteric misperceptions had been peeled away. With a few exceptions, the
Fang Shi w ould largely stay hidden, at least until their teachings found a
prominent place in Yixue lore through their exposure by Chen Tuan 
(906-981)
and their subsequent impact on the thought of Shao Yong and Zhou Dunyi in
the Song dynasty. In general, the trend of this school of thought may be
considered a continuation of the Xiang Shu Xue,  with more Daoist overtones.
Members of the second branch, philosophical Daoism, combined with the
Guwen Jia , or Old Text School of Confucianism, to form the Xuanxue J ia, the
School of the Mystery Learning. The blend of the two components was roughly
half and half: Kongfuzi was seen as a sage who was at least on a par with Laozi
and Zhuangzi. This school has been known by other names . Qing Tan Jia, or the
Pure Conversation School, was current at the time. It is best known in the West as
Neo-Daoism. In the Song dynasty it was called the Yi Li Jia, or the Meaning and
Principle School, and this is by far the most informative name as it contrasts well
with the Xiang Shu Jia,  the Image and Num ber School, and reflects the diametric
and dialectical opposition of the two approaches. Where the Xiang S hu school
was structural, the Yi Li school was oriented to function.
Two major factors contributed to the rise of the Yi Li J ia. The Han dynasty
had disintegrated with the beginning of the Period of Disunity (which lasted until
the Sui and Tang dynasties). Confucianism had not been able to hold the empire
522

together, and Kongfuzi himself had been restored to a humble mortality since the
Guwen Xue. There was far less favored status for scholars at imperial courts. The
kind of thinking of the Yi Li Jia  did not require this massive social superstructure.
Philosophical Daoism had provided a new, more natural, and less formal looking
glass with which to examine the classics. And second, the overly-elaborated
speculations of the Xiang Shu Jia , found in the Weishu (including the Yiwei s hu)
appeared to have run their course with more busyness than effect and credibility.
The leader of the Yi Li school, with specific regard to the Yijing, was Wang
Bi (226-249). In his short twenty-four year life he wrote important commentaries
on both Laozi’s Dao De Jing  and the Yijing, the latter called the Zhouyi z hu and
the Zhouyi lueli. These two commentaries would later be expanded, with sub-
commentaries, by Han Kangbo (d. c. 385) and Kong Yingda (574-648). These
have been translated into English by Richard Lynn (see Bibliography). Wang Bi
described his approach as sao xiang, sweeping out the images, referring to the
clutter and extraneousness accumulated in centuries of interpretive fussing over
the diagrams. He used the school’s methodology of  ming li , or name principles,
also called zheng ming, or the rectification of nam es, in trying to move inward
towa