ssons bought dearly with lives and in blood. The two will now 
squeeze all the growth that they can from this cost. Those of proven valor and skill  
will be granted power and land. Those who tried to help, but did not, still risked their  
lives for the cause and are honored with coin and gratitude. Life is still for learning. 
99

07, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 13, Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
qian gua (inverse): 08, Bi, Belonging
jiao gua (reverse): 08, Bi, Belonging
hu gua (nuclear): 24, Fu, Returning
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
07, Notes
* 07.0 It would be misleading to translate shi as “The Army,” especially with its
connotation of “standing army.” However, the late 20th century army (militia) of
Switzerland, provides a nearly perfect example of the hidden, liquid and mobile
reserves described and advocated here. Their knives also have the corkscrews and
fingernail files.
07, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yesod in Assiah
* Tarot: Nine of Pentacles
* Astrology: Luna in Earth
07, Quotations
* A government needs a hundred soldiers for every guerrilla it faces.
—Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar
* This year will go down in history. For the first time, a civilized nation has full
gun registration. Our streets will be safer, our police more efficient, and the world
will follow our lead into the future. —Adolf Hitler, 1935
* Among the many misdeeds of the British rule in India, history will look upon
the Act depriving a whole nation of arms as the blackest. —Gandhi
* Whither depart the souls of the brave that die in battle   /  Die in the lost,
lost fight for the cause that perishes with them. —Arthur Hugh Clough
* A king may choose his garments as he will, there is no certain test.
But a beggar cannot hide his poverty. —Aleister Crowley, Liber Legis
* A strange game, Professor Falkan. The only winning move is not to play.
—War Games (movie)
* I see many soldiers; could I but see many warriors! "Uniform" one calleth
what they wear; may it not be uniform what they therewith hide!
—Nietzsche, TSZ#10
100

GUA 08, BI3, BELONGING
 
  Binary 000 010 = 02; Kun below, Kan above
08.X, Overall Image
Across the earth there is water
Belonging
The early sovereigns, accordingly,
established the numerous realms
to make kinsmen of all of the leaders
Across the commonest ground, the waters collect, drawn on by the least resistance
to gather. The myriad streams pay a tribute to ocean, holder of all the deep regions.
To make the water come your way, move to the lowest place. To know where this is
just follow the pull, sense the undercurrents, the interconnectedness, the tidal forces.
The rivers and rains take the low path to ocean. The high achievements and the lofty
ideals become islands. This is far more humble than that. Troubles are fewest when
families stand united, related and familiar. Where the family is in fragments, grant it
some common ground. One rarely hears of factions, fragments and pieces of water.
08.0, Belonging
Promising
For a first consultation, supreme and enduring commitment
Not a mistake
Wanting peace, approach directly
The late are the unfortunate ones
Belonging is drawn by attraction; it’s not a thing to be pushed. Holding the people
together is not a thing that you think of, plan, then jump up and do. It is something
you make yourself ready for, or worthy of, or appropriate to. The spontaneous ones
arrive first, feeling their way in, finding their place, the preliminaries done in accord
with their natures, not in accordance with judgment and logic. Life has had long ages
to figure family out. The older parts of a primate’s brain are filled with little scripts
and devices to hold the band together, the subtlest signals and signs, rewards, alarms,
taboos and incentives, or even tricks like love to keep you from eating your children.
The family goes way  back. If you are in the right place then right things will come.
But do not ask the water to climb. Why are you not where you say that you wanted
to be? Ask firs