s discussed, an innuendo is left hanging in
the air like bad gas that the Yi might have changed its own intended use during
this period, centuries after its authors were gone, that little ideas were somehow
changed into big ideas by some sort of retroactive understanding. How could the
original purpose of the book be created by subsequent commentators? I think the
big ideas were there all along. People evolve and mature at different rates, and
perceive what they are capable of perceiving at different stages in 
this evolution.
It is entirely possible that the authors of the Zhouyi were merely a few centuries
ahead of their time, and that Spring and Autumn readers of their work were only
now beginning to mature and catch up with the original intent or idea.
14

I will concur wholeheartedly with the scholars that the  Zhouyi was not the
manual of social engineering that Confucians made of it, nor is it the m anual of
cosmological mysteries that the religious Daoists saw. But I will not join t hese
modernists and drag it all the way back to the caves of paleolithic society and put
it into the hands of superstitious savages either. I do not consider the Yi to be a
work of philosophy in the genre of Warring States teachings. But the idea that
the Yi might have been, at least in a small way, an ethical manual does not seem at
all incongruous, nor does it seem out of line to see the Yi as a "primitive" book of
psychology, most useful for the fine tuning of attitudes.
15

Problems with Academia
Why, anybody can have a brain. That's a very mediocre commodity. Every
pusillanimous creature that crawls on the Earth or slinks through slimy seas has a
brain. Back where I come from, we have universities, seats of great learning,
where men go to become great thinkers. And when they come out, they think
deep thoughts and with no more brains than you have! But they have one thing
you haven't got - a diploma. The Wizard of Oz
The juvenile sea squirt wanders through the sea searching for a suitable rock or
hunk of coral to cling to and make its home for life. For this task, it has a
rudimentary nervous system. When it finds its spot and takes root, it doesn't need
its brain anymore so it eats it!  It's rather like getting tenure.
      Daniel Dennett, Consciousness Explained
Context Criticism
Context criticism sounds promising enough in theory: As applied here it is
simply a reductionist methodology whereby the Chinese terms are glossed only
according to meanings which are attested or known to have been current at the
time of the original writing, as evidenced in works of appropriate date other than
the subject text, or penned in about the same period. This suggests that it is
possible, even preferable, to translate the Zhouyi (or at least to compile the whole
of the glossary used in its translation) without even looking at the Zhouyi. On the
surface this sounds like a perfect approach – there are no messy self-referential
tautologies to pollute the results.
This is a typical statement of the position: Translators "have understood
each character as though it had the meaning attached to it after the Qin dynasty
... [and] chose only one of the possible meanings of each character. Today's
translator must consider others ... . If one stays within the limits of what can be
found in other 
texts of appropriate date, and avoids anachronisms, the choice is
not arbitrary." (Rutt p 212-213)
And another: "And if you look at the translations by Rutt or Kunst, who
translate the Zhouyi text in terms of the meanings the words had at the time of
composition, in the early Zhou period, it's quite apparent that the target audience
for the book is a warrior aristocracy, and that the book's maj or concerns are the
taking of captives and human sacrifice. No Daoism there, ... no Confucianism
either, or any other philosophical overtones - all added later ... ."     (internet post)
While context criticism has gained a rather broad acceptance, nobody
seems to have bothere