h of least resistance. The northeast was within the new domain and
was therefore a permissible direction, but here it is seen as more challenging than
is currently necessary.
* 02.0 This line may also be rendered as“peaceful persistence is promising.” But
finding one’s se curity in what is already guaranteed by being already at hand may
be the best way to find a peaceful persistence. This is Ji, or lucky.
* 02.2 Paraphrasing Shunryu Suzuki, see “Quotes” at Gua 25.
69

02, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 01, Qian, Creating
qian gua (inverse): 02, Kun, Accepting
jiao gua (reverse): 02, Kun, Accepting (chong gua 0)
hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 02, 23, 24, 27
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 10th Moon (Nov)
02, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Binah in Assiah
* Tarot: Three of Pentacles
* Astrology: Neptune in Earth
02, Quotations
* The breathing of the true human being comes from the heels. — Zhuangzi
* “Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?”
“That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,” said the cat.
“I don’t much care where ...” said Alice.
“Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,” said the cat. —Lewis Carroll
* Sitting quietly  /  Doing nothing
Spring comes  /  The grass grows by itself —Zen
* Gratitude is not only the greatest of all virtues but the parent of all others.
—Cicero
* ‘Tis a gift to be simple, ‘Tis a gift to be free
‘Tis a gift to come round to where we ought to be. —“Simple Gifts”
* We shall not cease from exploring  /  And the end of our exploring
Will be to arrive where we started  /  And know the place for the first time.
—T.S. Eliot
* Paradise is exactly like where you are right now ... only much, much better.
—Laurie Anderson
70

GUA 03, ZHUN1 (or TUN2), RALLYING
 
  Binary 100 010 = 34; Zhen below, Kan above
03.X, Overall Image
Clouds and thunder
Rallying
The noble young one, accordingly, sorts warp from weft
This is only a heavy storm, not nature’s cruelty or wrath, but to the young sprout,
it’s an unplanned test of a right to survive in a world suspiciously too full of youth.
Just life against chaos, there is nothing personal going on here. First it was stones
where he wanted his roots and now this. In the blinding rain, with pressing needs,
goals are lost to view, except to keep from coming undone. Impatient frustration
just leads to more tangles. He cannot impose his plan with all this defending to do.
The young noble locates his feet and stays put, humbly calling on helpers, noting
his losses, counting his blessings. The warp is what will persist: this is first to sort.
03.0, Rallying
Supreme fulfillment
Worthwhile to be persistent
Not at all useful to have somewhere to go
Worthwhile to enlist delegates
The sky fills with chaos while heaven creates. The desperate young thing is faced
with few choices, none by design or deserved. And when it seems to be only you,
against all the chaotic world, the trick is to rethink what ‘you’ is, to include the sum
of your helpers and all the resources at hand. Collect the wits first and start turning
things to advantage. The one who can even use losses will be the one who’s set back
the least. Even while on the defensive, when you cannot impose the least part of your
plan, a humble niche can still be fought for and won, given the right-sized ambition.
Then struggle becomes future fitness and loss just the loss of things never needed.
The human mind is so skilled at taking advantage from trial and tests that folks can
look back in time and declare, with the straightest of faces: All this happened  to me
for reasons unknown at the time, but this must have been part of some greater plan.
But in fact the reason here is only the method of life, stealing just a little more order
from chaos, one small life at a time. Coherence, persistence of order, is no great rule
directing heaven or all of the powers that be. Keeping order is life’s little challenge.
71

03.M, Key Words
Struggle, difficult beginning