y bronzes are suggestive numerals and shapes, but
nothing like the solid and broken lines we have today. Furthermore, the earliest
evidence that we do have depicts the Yin or broken line as ^ instead of - -. It is
suggested that the Gua could not have been composed of Yin and Yang lines, or
of broken and solid lines, until the Warring States when Yin/Yang cosmology was
developed. But in fact this reasoning is specious. The use of a si mple binary grap-
hic does not necessarily imply the Yin-Yang theory or any binary cosmology or
system of thought. It could all have begun here as nothing more than a crude
graphic representation. Then authors of the Wings may have read the Gang/Rou
precursors of Yin/Yang back into this (the same way they retroactively inserted
so much else, like Correctness, Holding Together, etc). In fact, the broken and
solid lines of the Zhouyi could be the very seeds which led to the development of
the Rou/Gang or Yin/Yang ideas many centuries later. Consequently, I don't see
in these arguments any reason to override or dismiss the traditional assumption
that the Gua had shape very early in their history. The subject of Gua Shape ( Gua
Xiang or Gua Xing) is discussed further in Dimensions.
In cases where no identifiable picture could be discerned, deciphering the
image would be more troublesome. Since the six lines are stacked one on top of
another, from bottom to top, in a process which takes time, the lower lines came to
491

be seen as further back in time and space, the upper as moving ahead in time and
space. In addition, there was a tendency to see these diagrams as analogs of the
person, with the upper lines being more head-like in nature and the lower more
foot-like. By extension of this, the task of the upper lines was akin to headwork
and problem-solving, and that of the lower lines akin to footwork, groundwork,
fundamentals or basics. But these two associations provided only a metaphorical
structure, not a metaphorical meaning. The coexistence of Ba Gua or T rigrams at
this early stage of the process remains the best explanation for the further
assignment or development of the Gua meanings and associations. Without
making this big assumption I will readily confess to being at a loss for a good
explanation, unless these were based upon pure observation and inductively
reasoned conclusions from multiple observations over long spans of time. But I’d
have difficulty acknowledging the existence of scientific method in this era.
Once each Gua of the set was imbued with its own cluster of meanings, it
was inevitable, if not a part of the original idea, that each of the six lines in each
diagram would come to have a meaning of its own. The question was: from what
source would these ideas come? The derivation of detailed meanings for each of
the lines meanings would require an entirely new insight.
The Duke of Zhou, who was considered an avatar of filial piety, or of picking
up the torch of the father and the ancestors, had this insight, or is at least credited
with finding it: When any particular “thing” is stressed, it undergoes a change. If
one lays stress (this is not a pun) on a particular line within a Gua, that line will
change. And since this system is binary, i.e. either one thing or another, the only
change a line can make will be into its opposite. This phenomenon was called
Enantiodromia by the Greeks. Carl Jung used this term to
 describe how any
particular development brings about a reciprocal counterforce. Sir Isaac Newton
called it the Third Law of Motion: for every action there is an equal and opposite
reaction. Now, when any one of the six lines of a Gua changes into its opposite, it
becomes another diagram, one which differs from the original by only one line. In
other words, when one lays stress on a particular line, this sets up a movement
between two of the diagrams. Since the diagrams, by this point in history, now
have particular meanings, the change indicated by the particular line