d look and new insight. This would be an especially fun thing to do with
"omen or 'peasant interpretation' texts."
It is a common activity of the scholars to try to reduce the meaning of a
chapter to a specific phenomenon or event, Gua 01 to a dragon constellation, Gua
27

25 to an epidemic, Gua 55 to an eclipse, etc. Much bending and twisting is then
required to jam the entire text into this particular mold, and understanding is often
the victim. Line 36.1 has been said to be about a "feigning bird" and this is
paraded about for nods of approval - we all know that birds feign. Well, we’ve
heard about it. But who has watched this? A mother duck will flop about to
simulate a broken wing in order to capture the attention of the coyote and
distract his attention from her ducklings. At the last minute she flies away. This is
not what the young noble is doing in line one; in fact it is the very opposite - he is
"dragging his wing" in order to avoid attention altogether, or to become invisible-
he is not eating in order to avoid betraying his predator's appetite. This is in the
end nothing more than a flawed attempt to justify the mistranslation of Ming Yi as
bright (or calling) bird (or pheasant). In sum, my guess is that allusions that are too
specific to be of general application perhaps never were more than entendres,
references that were never meant to be taken merely at face value but instead as
challenges to look more deeply. And yet the allusions were supposed to remain.
Narrow Glosses (Hexagram Names)
Another important subset of the narrow gloss issue arises in the translation
of Hexagram Names (Gua Ming). It is not known at what point in history t hese
names or "chapter titles" became a part of the Zhouyi. This may have occurred in
the Early Zhou, or at least by time of the Spring and Autumn references  in the
Zuozhuan. The primary function of these names are of course mnemonic - they
are intended as handles to facilitate a recollection of both the text and the graphic
hexagram symbol. They are not intended to define or circumscribe the content of
the text. Nevertheless, the modernists would assign them glosses every bit as
narrow as any other words in the book. What they are not taking into account is
that each of the names is a stand-in for one sixty-fourth of the human experience,
not what one might think of as a narrow topic. Maybe dancing elephants make
up one sixty-fourth of the circus clown's world ... .
Two early western scholars, Lacouperie and Conrady, took 
a bold and
unpopular step and called the Yijing a lexicon or dictionary. The ideas which
they were proposing in conjunction with this statement were a little preposterous,
but in this notion itself there lies an interesting and valuable observation. It is
common, throughout the Yijing, and the Chinese language in general, to see the
specific meaning of a Chinese term defined by its context. In western philosophy
and science it is an accepted practice to re-define a term which has a number of
alternate meanings with a meaning which is specific to the present application.
This is known as “operational definition.” This practice of defining a term for its
present use seems to occur frequently in the Yi, especially in the Gua Ming. A
good example may be found at Gua 09, Xiao Chu, which I have ventured to
translate fairly literally as “Raising Small Beasts.” The word Chu means care,
nurture, animal husbandry or domestication; Xiao is small, common, little or minor.
Little or Minor Concerns is an equally appropriate translation. The text does not
speak at all about keeping chickens contained and productive. To use more
modern anachronistic terms, it speaks of micromanagement, fussiness, attrition and
28

getting caught up in details. Later, in the Da Xiang  or Overall Image, the text
speaks about the winds which move across heaven, or time: winds which carry
the fine grit which either polishes or erodes our little lives in the greater scheme of
things. The remainde