hreads, traces, tracks and trails leave clues. The ideals will not
leave such tracks, nor do they do much for hunger. Knowledge can go either way
but wisdom is always applied. Knowledge might hunt where bushes are not, only
in order to see things more clearly. Mind in the field needs to ask better questions.248

32.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao* 28.5: older woman finds herself a young man to marry)
To continue in one’s character means persistence
For a woman of maturity, promising
For a man in youth, disappointment*
32.5x (For) a woman (of) maturity, persistence (is) promising:
To follow one through to completion
* (For) a man (in) youth, restraint (is) advised:
To follow the women (is) trouble
To persevere and persist means to survive and adapt. Since adaptation is always to
some kind of context, sometimes this will mean changing and sometimes staying
the same. The appropriate response is one which allows us to last. And so the one
may become predictable who would build a stable home, while the next becomes
adaptable to succeed in the changing world. Each one develops a character in order
to endure, but even though this becomes second nature, it still remains first nature
that is striving to continue. Consistency is more than adopting predictable patterns
of acting. Even the simplest characters  have many facets and sides. In a world that
keeps changing and showing us different sides, it is only fair to reciprocate when
it suits our own best interests. There are times to be tricky and times to be known.
32.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.6: cauldron’s jade grip, nothing not advantageous)
Continuously stimulated
Unfortunate
32.6x Continuously stimulated at the top:
Greatly lacking in merit
Sleeping and waking, loss and gain, darkness and light: each pair is a pair of points
to be found on a greater continuum. For someone being continuous, then, there may
still be some room to change back and forth. Rest and movement are kindred points.
Someone does not need to be either one or the other in order to continue. A restless
condition cannot be sustained, the constant pressure cannot be endured. One simply
burns up or boils away, or blows off steam in all the wrong places. It might not be
so important to adhere to a middle way. In fact it might be quite boring: this is only
the average path of those things enjoying both sides. The thundering winds seem so
restless, unwearied by their years. But the winds are not only driven by pressure’s
highs, they are also drawn by its lows. Two are not really two if in the continuum.
249

32, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 42, Yi, Increasing
qian gua (inverse): 31, Xian, Reciprocity
jiao gua (reverse): 42, Yi, Increasing
hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
32, Notes
* 32.5 This may be the most explicit of all of the Yi’s fan yao references, and still
it goes unnoticed. For who the woman and man are, see the yao ci at 28.5.
32, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Atziluth of Yetzirah
* Tarot: King of Swords
* Astrology: Libra Ascending, Cardinal Air
32, Quotations
* For a conscious being, to exist is to change, to change is to mature, to mature is
to go on creating oneself endlessly. —Henri Bergson
* No well informed person has declared a change of opinion to be inconstancy.
—Cicero
* Never do anything against conscience, even if the state demands it. —Einstein
* We set up a word at the point at which our ignorance begins, at which we can
see no further, e.g. the words ‘ I’ ‘ do’ ‘ suffer.’ —Nietzsche, WTP
* You did not come into this world
You came out of it
Like a wave comes out of the ocean
You are not a stranger here. —Alan Watts
* The great use of life is to spend it for something that will outlast it.
—William James
250

GUA 33, DUN4, DISTANCING
 
  Binary 001 111 = 15
33.X (Gen below, Qian above)
Beneath the sky is a mountain
Distancing
The noble young one, accordingly,
is distant from the common peop