to
crash against mountains, even the weather cannot manage greatness this gray day.
The victims wander about, claiming their special privileges. Lotus eaters continue
developing no art. No champions, no predators. The gentle prince hunts birds hiding
in the cave, from storms that will not be coming, with aim not that of an archer and
less than consummate skill, in slow to no motion. Nothing great will be caught on
this hunt. It is trifles, haze and dimness, without shadows to fear or bright rays to
blind, and chicken for dinner again. But think of all those things chicken tastes like!
62.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.6: bird burns nest, wanderer laughs, then weeps)
With no acknowledgement in passing others by
The flying birds get distance from this one
Bad omen
Surely a sign of calamity and suffering
62.6x With no acknowledgement (in) passing others by:
Beyond pretentiousness
He masters a dunghill but thinks it a summit, and calls himself master of mountains.
He passes an elder, but thinks him a beggar, and tosses a coin without looking. Little
success will come with excessive smallness, but this is less than that. The one way
the heedless can master all they survey is to shrink their world to near nothing and
survey as little as possible, to wrap themselves up in themselves, stay in an ignorant
mind, and heed no omens or portents. See the small birds keeping clear of this path,
sensing disaster to come. A huge amount of smallness is here. Humans think that
creation is all about them, and all of those countless galaxies are placed there to light
our way badly at night. So all alone in this world, the smallness we feel is nothing to
how small we are. We make a huge impression here, largely a huge embarrassment.
429

62, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 61, Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
qian gua (inverse): 62, Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
jiao guo (reverse): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth
hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
62, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Atziluth of Assiah
* Tarot: King of Pentacles
* Astrology: Capricorn Ascending, Cardinal Earth
62, Quotations
* Wisdom is ofttimes nearer when we stoop than when we soar. —Wordsworth
* Not a day passes over the earth, but men and women of no note do great deeds,
speak great words and suffer noble sorrows. —Charles Reade
* It is with trifles, and when he is off guard, that a man best reveals his character.
—Schopenhauer
* Interesting people can find something interesting in all things. —Idries Shah
* To carry the self forward and realize the ten thousand dharmas is delusion. That
the ten thousand dharmas advance and realize the self is enlightenment. —Dogen
* Enumerate as you may the parts of the chariot - you do not thereby gain the
chariot. Better to rumble like rocks than to jingle like jade. —Laozi
* Local activity is the keynote of the dervish path. —Yasavi
* I believe that the first test of a truly great man is his humility. I don't mean by
humility, doubt of his power. But really great men have a curious feeling that the
greatness is not of them, but through them. And they see something divine in every
other man and are endlessly, foolishly, incredibly merciful. —John Ruskin
* To be really great in little things, to be truly noble and heroic in the insipid details
of everyday life, is a virtue so rare as to be worthy of canonization.
—Harriet Beecher Stowe
* The invariable mark of wisdom is to see the miraculous in the ordinary.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
430

GUA 63, JI4 JI4, ALREADY COMPLETE
 
  Binary 101 010 = 42 (2/3); Li below, Kan above
63.X, Overall Image
Water positioned over the flame
Already complete
The noble young one, accordingly, contemplates sorrows
and so prepares to maintain against them
Water over a flame: a precarious but useful arrangement, if this can be maintained.
Too much flame and the water dries up, but with too much water the fire goes out.
Picture such a condition: clarity meets its best cha