an exhaustive process
covering a range of possibilities (such as climbing up the nine hills at 51.2).
The Scale of Eight is represented only by the Ba Gua, the eight three-line
diagrams. Despite the assertions made in the legendary history of the Yi that the Ba
Gua came down from ancient times, to be later combined into the sixty-four Gua,
there is as yet no strong evidence of this either in the early literature or among the
Shang dynasty Oracle or Dragon Bones. There is only the assumption that an
elemental concept (Ba Gua) must precede a compound one (Gua). But, as the text
of the Da Xiang, or Overall Image, makes delightfully clear, there is no better way
to decipher the meaning of a Hexagram text than by analyzing the 
relationship
between its two constituent Ba Gua. It appears unlikely that the sets of meanings
and connotations of the Ba Gua were very fully developed at the time the Zhouyi
was written. Elemental images such as water, wood and shock will appear in the
text where they might be expected. There are also certain preponderances of ideas
447

which occur with statistical significance in the Chong G ua, those Hexagrams
composed of three-line figures doubled (e.g. words for seems or likeness  in Gua
30). Because there is neither an external reference nor an explicit internal reference
to the Ba Gua in the Zhouyi, the modernists insist that they did not exist yet. This
is another fallacy - a lot of elements and dimensions are never explicitly mentioned.
And it completely ignores another statistically significant phenomenon: there
exists a very intriguing plethora of Chinese reiteratives in the Chong G ua. These
are doubled words such as xi xi, e e, su su, suo suo  and jue j ue in Gua 51. There is
also the phrase Xi Kan , repeated crisis, as the Gua Ming for Gua 29. (William
deFancourt also develops this line of thinking in his "Some Thoughts on the Eight
Trigrams," in Oracle 1.4). There will be more be said on other aspects of this subject
under History.
The Scales of Ten, Twelve, Sixteen and Forty, as I have used them in the
Wai Guang  segments throughout, do not occur as such in the Yijing. These are,
however, drawn along “natural” lines, or “grain,” which occur within the Yijing ’s
inherent geometry and the attributes of its elements. The first clue that this might
be a meaningful exercise came when I grafted Crowley’s assignment of sixteen of
the Gua to the sixteen Court Cards of the Tarot onto the Xian Tian arrangement of
the Gua and saw the bilaterally symmetrical pattern. Crowley also began to make
the connections between the Ba Gua, the Qabalah’s Sepiroth and Astrology’s
Planets. But he never saw the system as complete as it is presented here. See
Dimensions, Figures 31 through 34, and a few of the Index Keys at the end of the
book.
The Scale of Ten holds an important place in Chinese culture, in the form of
the Shi Gan Tian, or The Ten Celestial Stems, but this is not developed in the Yi.
Also, an ancient ten-day week is mentioned in the Zhouyi at 55.1.
The Scale of Twelve, in the form of the Shi Er Di Zhi, or The Twelve Earthly
Branches, appears in an interesting reference 
in the Zhouyi (at 19.0) to what are
known as The Sovereign Gua of the Twelve Moons, hinting that the assignments
of twelve of the Gua to something at least like the Twelve Branches had already
been made by the end of the Early Zhou. This scale is also discussed and graphed
in the Dimensions chapter.
The Scale of Sixteen appears in two forms, both of which are embedded
within the structures of the Hexagram or Gua. The first is in the occurrence of the
Trigrams or Ba Gua in either the lower ( Zhen Gua) or the upper ( Hui Gua) places,
where they are interpreted differently: the first as a convergent or subjective force
or sense w ithin, and the latter as a divergent or objective force or sense without.
See Dimensions, under Ban Xiang , The Half Images, and the segment on Zhen and
Hui Gua in the text for each of the Trigrams or Ba Gua belo