n to. Nearly all his relations are distant, yet
his best skill is making good will out of suspicion and welcome out of strangeness.
389

56.M, Key Words
Traveler, stranger, itinerant, peddler, newcomer, visitor, guest, disciple, pilgrim
Walkabout, vision quest; perpetual novelty, insecurity; caravanserai, inn, shelter
Portability, light travel, roughing it, going native; ad hoc  life, living without a net
Earning a welcome; tact, wit, modesty, self-reliance, versatility, a few good tools
Dynamic equilibrium, self-sustaining systems; the tactics of intrusion, diplomacy
Varieties of people who wander, as a source of uncertainty, curiosity & suspicion
56.G, From the Glossary
lu3 (a, the) wanderer, traveler, itinerant, guest, vagabond, stranger, wayfarer,
visitor; wandering; order, sequence, arrangement; backbone, spine, strength; (to)
travel, drift, wander, sojourn; dispose, arrange (to be) temporary, provisional,
ad hoc; wandering, traveling, visiting, itinerant; a unit of 500 troops
56.T, Tuan Zhuan
The wanderer
(Means) modest fulfillment
The flexible finds the balance on the outside
And so complies with firmness
Restraint along with dependence on clarity
This is how, (with) modest fulfillment,
The wanderer’s persistence (is) promising
The wanderer’s appropriate timing (is) very important here!
390

56.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.1: taking steps, confused, respect avoids error)
The wanderer is fussy and annoying
And so this position courts suffering
56.1x The wanderer (is) fussy (and) annoying:
The objectives (are) exhausted (in) adversity
He busies himself in trivial matters, treating this new place too lightly. The locals
soon learn that this stranger is no king or god in disguise.* Such legends precede
him, but he ruins this great introduction. For ent ering new situations, his humility
is useful, but not humiliation. This calls down contempt, not a welcome. Wanderers
and the homeless are very different breeds. The wanderer has many places to go.
Humility is only one of a number of traits that the locals might look for. They may
look for purpose without a hidden agenda, or dignity without distance, or a sense
of humor about the human condition, without the sneering and cynical parts. The
long-sighted pilgrim can let them know of his needs, or that he wished things were
different. Neither bum, nor beggar, nor fool will have the luck an ambassador will.
56.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.2: cauldron full, rivals anxious, not our pursuit)
The wanderer comes to a camp
Cherishing those resources
And earning a young helper’s loyalty
56.2x Gaining a young helper’s loyalty:
An outcome with no complaint
The wanderer comes to the inn with his property still on his shoulders. Skilled and
self-sufficient, but otherwise not wealthy, he offers to either pay or earn his night’s
lodging. The hot bath and rest are worth either. He carries what tools he will need
inside the rest of his home. The first time he hears you are welcome, this is only a
formality, and a challenge to hear it again but spoken sincerely. Innkeepers learn to
be wary. But this wanderer has the habit of being a guest in a truly great home, each
new land a new room, entering and parting, and faring well a lot,with his open-ended
closure, and always welcome back. Fire dances atop the log to celebrate moving on.
Once again he transforms an innkeeper’s tension and doubt. Another fireside story,
hot meals and a journeyman’s new apprentice. Accommodation works both ways.
391

56.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion 
(Fan Yao 35.3: many liberties, regrets pass) 
The wanderer sets fire to their camp 
And fails the young assistant 
Persisting is hard to do 
56.3x The wanderer sets fire to their camp: 
And (only) then considers the harm here 
* Until (one) wanders with humility 
This principle (is) lost 
Of course the stranger is the primary suspect. He is only the wrong kind of wanted  
right now. Nobody knows where he comes from or goes. The