tem of philosophy. Fung Yulan calls this the biggest turning point in
the history of Chinese philosophy and divides his treatise here, between the
Period of the Philosophers and that of the Classical Learning. One way to
517

describe this might be as a turning away from the process of creating philosophy
to the process of interpreting and synthesizing it.
The specific cluster of tenets held by Dong Zhongshu personally were not
the whole of Confucianism. This particular set of beliefs, which relied heavily on
the interrelated structures of ideas, soon came to be known as the Xiang Shu Jia,
or the Image and Number School, and its doctrine known as the Xiang Shu Xue ,
the Image and Number Learning. This is also called by the name Jin We n Jia, or
the New Text School, for its emphasis on the new writings and syntheses (and to
contrast it with the next school discussed). Few of the writings of this school
have survived completely intact, but there are a number of edited collections
known as the Yiwei Shu , or the Apocryphal Yi Writings. The word Wei here is the
counterpart to Jing, a classic, or the warp of a fabric which runs through time; wei
means the woof, or weft, of the weave, or sideways elaborations on the cl assics.
Wei is a synchronic notion, Jing is a diachronic notion. Three of these collections
are the Yiwei Qianzuodu  (with commentary by Zheng Xuan, 127-200), the Yiwei
Shileimou, and the Yiwei Jilantu . The term Weishu refers to sets of apocryphal
Han commentaries on the broader range of classical subjects.
The terms Xiang S hu, Image and Number, are sometimes translated together
as “numerology”. This is a little misleading and incomplete, although the term
does connote a lack of cogent thinking in large portions of this Han speculation.
At its best, Xiang Shu  uses image as metaphor and extended analogy to explore
and extrapolate ideas, and move between realms and frames of perception, using
larger patterns and matrices in the organization and taxonomy o
f the intra-set
relationships between parts of whole systems. And it uses number in three ways:
ordinal in the sequencing of ideas, cardinal in the division of a set into a number
of parts (scaling), and hierarchical to address set theory and orders of magn itude.
The more existentialistic of these scholars moved consciously from thing-making
perception to things to images to numbers. They were my stics: they understood
and wrote about Tai Yi, the Great Unity, and grasped that thing-making was a
human perceptual problem. With reference to Yijing interpretation, these new
Xiang S hu ideas and dimensions often provided us interesting new perspectives
and points of departure for fresh commentary, as does “hybrid vigor” in botany.
But sometimes the resemblance to the thought of Pythagoras (582-507 BCE),
and much worse, to Plato (fl. 360-330 BCE) is striking. These two archetypal
philosophers tended to look into the “mirror of the world” and see only the
structure of their own epistemologies and algorithms reflected back at them in
perfectly reversed order as metaphysical ontologies. In other words, instead of
seeing these ideas as useful categories for the human activity of categorization,
they were taken as the skeletal structures of the universe. And many of the Xiang
Shu scholars came to the same conclusion, that orders and numbers were the true
atomic reality, the true nature of things, and not merely a linguistic description of
things and their causes. What they failed to understand here was the fallacy of
arguing from analogy, and that they were constructing their edifice to account
for all of nature upon what was at bottom merely human cunning and artifice.
518

This human artifice is most useful and least fallacious when it is seen and
used for what it is, and suggestion by analogy is our potential enrichment, not
fallacy. Take a look at twentieth century Western numerology. You use it to add
up the letters of your name or the numbers of your birth date and ther