It is about moving thr ough
life’s changes with anxiety put in its proper place in the much greater scheme of
things. It is thus not a w ild claim to call it the first self-help book of psychology,
although it began within a help-others tradition. As a work of philosophy, even
the early layers of the Zhouyi can rightly be considered as such only if one
returns to the origin of the term, coined by Pythagoras, as “the love of wisdom,”
as distinct from the love of knowledge and the practice of sophistry. Wi sdom
requires a lifetime of learning, and accordingly, once again, we must keep our
questions alive. There must be room in an open mind, and an ability to unlearn.
Perhaps more than anything else, the Book of C hanges is intended to be a
tutor who is also a friend. A friend who can travel through time. A friend who can
be completely and brutally candid with you. And a friend w ho can make you
laugh at yourself. It would be hard to conjure up a more appropriate im age of the
Yi than that of the Duke of Zhou acting as temporary regent while trying to r eady
his powerful young nephew Cheng for the throne, after having just learned a
great deal about human beings and their manners of straying from their proper
human path. What does one pass along to a child with this much power and this
much potential? This is precisely the “perfect place to stand” that the Greek
thinker Archimedes wished for, the place from which he could move the world
with his lever. It was the exercise of information as power.
513

The Dragon’s Journey
The term Yi Xue, or Yi Studies, or the Yi Learning, encompasses the broader
history and study of the Yi as it moved through the millenia, influencing in its
path (though sometimes indirectly) nearly every school and philosopher from the
Han dynasty to the Qing.* The present section will track some of this long (pun
intended) journey, beginning shortly before the Qin and Han dynasties, to set the
context and trace back some of the streams to enter later.
The section following this is a timeline chronology, included as a summary
and reference. This is by no means complete, nor do I intend to complete it, nor do
I claim any knowledge of many of the entries to be found there. This should be
thought of as a collection and organization of most of the dates and references
encountered in the works cited in the Bibliography, transcribed to Pinyin. Most
came from the works cited at the end of the Bibliography as Histories. These all
have valuable bibliographies of their own. It is my hope that someone will one
day compile a well-annotated, book-length expansion of this timeline. What we
have at present is extremely difficult to wade and sort through. Fung Yulan is the
most complete and best organized, but the work is a little dated and he had no
specific focus on the Yi.
The earliest literary references to divination are to be found in the Shijing
(the Book of Odes, Poetry or Songs) and the Shujing (the Book of History or
Documents). The Shijing refers only to Shell divination or plastromancy (at 1.4.6
and 3.1.3). The Shujing mentions divination using both Shell and Milfoil or
Yarrow stalks at 2.2 and 5.4 but the Zhouyi is not mentioned by name. There is at
5.4 an intriguing reference to Zhen and Hui as paired omens. These terms, as Zhen
and Hui Gua, are used (later at least) to refer to the inner and outer T rigrams of a
Hexagram. But this is not enough evidence to be certain of anything. This could
refer to another form of Milfoil divination, or 
these could be earlier terms for the
Ben and Zhi Gua . Both the Shi and the Shu contain a dozen or so images in
common with the Yi (for examples see Shi 1.10.8 compared to Yi 53.4, and several
at Shi 2.5.1 and Shu 5.25). But this in itself establishes no connection since these
images are as likely to have a common source in the broader culture.
The Zuozhuan  (Zuo’s Commentary on the Spring and Autumn period) and
the Guoyu (the Discourse on the States, during the Spring and Autu