together in a greater whole.
The Scale of Two, polarity or dichotomy, takes many forms, and it is very
important to note that not all possible pairs fit into the Rou and Gang ( Yin and
Yang) system of classification. The Yijing’s Scale of Two is called either Er Yao,
The Two Lines, Er Chi, The Two Essences, or Liang Y i, The Two Powers. This
particular set of pairs is concerned with matched complements and not with paired
antagonists or all-or-none dichotomies. For instance, later in this chapter, in
excerpting glosses from the fifth and sixth Wings (the Xi C i Zhuan) to illustrate
how the these authors thought of Rou and Gang, I had to be careful not to mislead
by including such pairs as Unfortunate and Fortunate ( Xiong and Ji), Wrong and
Right ( Shi and De) and Death and Life (Si and Sheng). While it is obvious that
that these pairs belong together in dyadic relationships, they do not bear the same
kind of relationship to each other that Rou and Gang do. We do not want to
encourage overly simplistic thinking here: we humans have suffered much over the
centuries from mistaken dualisms (man is to woman as superior is to inferior; us is to
them as good is to evil, caucasian is to negro as light is to darkness). The dualisms
which occur in the Yi are not concerned with “moral” judgments, even when they
contrast superior with inferior or strong with weak. The complementary Scale of
Two also plays an important role in the structure of the Hexagrams or Gua. See
Dimensions, under Ban Xiang , the H alf Images (Zhen and Hui Ba Gua). There is
445

also more discussion of dichotomy in Di mensions, under Gua Ming, the Hexagram
Names.
The Scale of Three, as found in most cultures, will tend to take two forms,
which may be called Synchronic or Spatial and Diachronic or Temporal. The first,
or spatial, places an equally important mediating or equilibrating force bet ween
two opposites. In the body of Yi commentary, and Chinese culture generally, these
are the San C ai, The Three Powers: of H eaven ( Tian), Humanity (Ren) and Earth
(Di). In the structure of the Hexagrams or Gua, these are the San Wei , the Three
Places or Dignities. See Dimensions, under San C ai. The second or temporal kind
of triplicity places the present ( Jin) between past ( Wang) and future ( Lai), or more
accurately, some way of looking at the present between ways of looking at past
and future. This kind of triplicity, which of course concerns Change, is at the heart
of the way the Book of Changes  is used, and is discussed implicitly in Dimensions,
under Gua Bian, or the Hexagram Changes. The temporal triplicity also appears in
the Zhouyi text at 18.0 and 57.5 ( Zhi Gua 18.0), where it concerns the getting of
fresh perspectives on time and change. Finally, the positions of the three lines in
the Ba Gua, especially as conceived of as a family, appear to have meanings
associated with a temporal triplicity. The bottom line might be seen as Beginning
(Zhen simply goes, while Xun i
s ready to go, given the right opportunity). The
middle line could be W hile Going ( Kan concentrates and integrates, while Li
appreciates and differentiates). The top line could be After Going ( Gen simply
stops, while Dui will have some satisfaction first).
The Scale of Four, or Quadruplicity, is nearly universal in human cultures.
This is best known in the west as the four Greek elements: fire, water, air and earth;
in the realm of human experience as father, mother, son and daughter; in our need
to grow food as summer, winter, spring and autumn; and in our need to remain
oriented as south, north, east and west. As cultures began to communicate, a
lasting cross-fertilization began, with long lists of attributes accruing to these four
groups of meanings. But often, due to cultural differences and to differing sets of
shared associations, there is not a similar universality in what goes into each of the
four categories. As such, there is no perfect system of translation between all of
these cu