I chose to place the Da Xiang or the
Overall Image before the Tuan or Judgment. The Da Xiang is from the Ten Wings
while the Tuan belongs to the original Zhouyi. I did this only because it provides a
clearer introduction to the overall themes of the Zhouyi texts.
A few things should be said about these “Rogue River Commentaries”, so
called because they were begun alongside this river in O regon, in the summer of
1976. Before anything else I should be clear that this effort does not in any way
attempt to explain the texts of the Book of Changes. It is not an attempt to do any
of your thinking for you or to make your task of understanding any easier. I have
already discussed why in the introduction: the meanings of the oracular texts should
not be narrowed before the question is framed or posed. An explanation would turn
on the translation and attempt to say what the text means. Instead I have tried to
leave the translation behind and move on as if it had been understood. Usually the
vehicle for this moving on is the original image or metaphor, extended in ways
which I take to be implicit in the original. Another way of saying this: I tried to put
on the original text and walk around in it some more, stretching it further, exploring
some of its tangents and implications and, in the process, try to drop as many clues
and hints as possible t
o some of the layers of meanings in the original. I made an
effort to keep the images timeless by keeping the technology simple: the characters
still drive oxcarts and chariots.
I have allotted a fixed amount of commentary space for each of the major
texts, eight lines for the Da Xiang, fourteen for the Tuan and ten for each of the Yao
Ci, or 514 commentary texts in all. Outside of this, and a little loose metering of the
prose, there is no real structure to these. Nor is there a single form or literary device.
It rather ranges all over the place, bathos in one t ext and bombast in the next. The
extended images, metaphors, analogies and parables seldom took the whole of this
allotted space. When I ran out of ideas, or stood in danger of beating the image to
death, I would then use them to explore the potential or broader applications of the
meanings. Usually this was directed to something which might be termed “the
human condition,” a subject matter much broader and more abstract than the more
common querent themes of money, health and love affairs. Because of the great age
of the Yi and the experience our species has gained during its three thousand years,
I took the opportunity to look at the human condition from a broader perspective
than any one culture affords, perspectives across the great water. Consequently you
may discern a great lack of politically correct thought and speech and might even
encounter a reference to ritual cannibalism as 
an alternative lifestyle. I felt it was
important to break up and out of our more rigid modes of culturally limited thought
53

and question conventional wisdom. Be aware that there are usually two attitudes or
ways of thinking implied in each of the texts. Sometimes the one which is opposite
that to which good or bad fortune is attached is only implied.
You will not see a coherent philosophy developed here. In fact, you will see
one text contradicting another. As discussed in the Introduction, this is the Book of
Changes, not the Book of Fixations, and its ethics in particular are often situational
and relative. Again, it may be helpful to see the Yi as more of an ancient psychology
text, or as a catalogue of attitudes. However, there is a “way of thinking” generally
presented here in the commentary. I have to claim this as largely my own, even the
many parts where I am merely playing advocatus diaboli. I am also rather painfully
aware that this way of thinking is not shared by large numbers of people in this
human civilization that we live in. I am often critical of the direction our species is
moving in. Sometimes I thought I might be writing for s