so it is important to learn to "lighten up", giving up all but the most
necessary baggage. Lightening up could be just the key, just the thing to do
against gravity. I think the line is similar in implication to this quote from David
Lloyd George: “Don't be afraid to take a big step if one is indicated. One cannot
cross a chasm in two small jumps.” [Btw: this is translating Yue4, with its feather
radical, as a shamanic feather dance, a rite of passage from one world to another].
But here is an example where vertical ambiguity is necessary. At the same time,
another querent might be ready to hear exactly the opposite: “Look down. This
is a serious jump. Rethink this whole thing. Life or death. Nothing funny here.”
The authors, at least from my perspective, appear light-hearted and playful
much of the time. They loved to look at things and problems in novel ways, a
nd
they loved to have fun with words and expressions. But I want to concentrate
here on lines which bear more of the structural properties of humor.
05.6
* The topmost line, divided, shows its subject entered into the cavern. But there
are three guests coming, without being urged, to his help. If he receive them
respectfully, there will be good fortune in the end. (Legge)
* Entering into a pit. With no invitations extended to v isitors, three people arrive.
To attend to them will end in good fortune.
The authors use the term Xue2 (pit, hole, cave) in several places the same
way we do, as (also) a predicament, or an emotional state, or the dumps of despair,
and as a pun.  The general idea of the Gua is to maximize the meantime, to get
ready for less humdrum experience to arrive, and to get worthy of its arrival. The
553

opportunity to have cleaned up one's pit, one's dump, has now passed and now
here come the guests. One can still salvage some dignity here by showing respect.
10.6
* The sixth line, undivided, tells us to look at the whole course that is trodden,
and examine the presage which that gives. If it be complete and without failure,
there will be great good fortune. (Legge)
* Studying the footsteps, examining the omens. (If) these come full circle, supreme
good fortune.
You have just finished treading on the tiger's tail. If you are still alive, this
can be taken as the primary measure of success. Ghosts do not leave footprints. If
your footprints to not lead all the way back to where you now stand, you must
have had bad luck somewhere. The omen is that you have already succeeded.
The natives of Fiji have a tongue in cheek peasant omen interpretation: if you are
walking through a coconut grove and a coconut lands on your head, this is an
omen that you had very bad luck.
13.5
* Men bound in fellowship first weep and lam ent, but afterwards they laugh.
After great struggles they succeed in meeting. b) That is, they are victorious.
(Wilhelm)
* Fellowship with others begins with wailing (and) weeping. But then follows
with laughter. Mighty armies can entertain each other. 13.5x Praising each others
abilities.
I hope the translation explained this one. There are other levels to meet on,
and the battlefields have better uses. The wordplay relies on the broad range of
meanings for Yu4 (7625), meet with, encounter, receive, entertain, engage, etc. to
show that there are other options in real life as well. Here is a fairly rare instance
where the Wing authors of the Xiao Xiang  "got it" as well.
15.1
* The first line, divided, shows us the superior man who adds hum ility to humility.
Even the great stream may be crossed with this, and there will be good fortune.
(Legge)
* Authentic modesty in the noble young one (is) useful (in) c
rossing great
streams. Promising.
This line illustrates the simple, straightforward application of incongruity, a
device used many times in the Zhouyi. The Gua Ming of Qian1, at least when it is
glossed as Modesty (instead of Hamster Crunching) is fraught with a number of
connotations which are inconsistent with the ideas being set forth her