hree thousand years
ago? Well, a lot of people are still not that mature. So let's ask instead: were a few
of the people, the people at the creative vanguard of their culture, already that
mature three thousand years ago?
The existence of multiple layers of meaning in the text is another subject
worth studying. The need for the oracle to speak to different situations, as well as
to different people at different stages of their personal evolution, will create  a
need for what I will call "vertical ambiguity." This is different from providing an
oracle which could "go either way" and simply weasel its way out of questions.
The prophet Mohammed is credited with giving the advice: "Speak to each one in
accordance with his degree of understanding." The idea that there are inferior and
superior levels of personal evolution and understanding might well repulse some
equalitarians, but I will adopt it here (as the Yijing  adopts it in Gua 59). At one
level the future can indeed be predicted - the thumb-twiddler who does nothing
to take charge of his life is fully justified in his belief in fate. At another level,
volitional change may be understood as magical. At another, one's mythological
entities explain life. At still another, it all comes around to science. In one
application humor is exactly the right medicine, in another, adopting a serious
attitude might mean life instead of death.
It is seldom asked: What level of understanding is the querent assumed to
possess by the authors of the oracle? This is a very important question that the
scholars would do well to pose. I 
have already suggested that the  Zhouyi  may
have been written for a slightly br oader group of users than just the sovereign
and his inner circle of diviners, perhaps including a gradual expansion into the
inner court and the highest of noble households. But even if this is so I doubt
that the intended readership was much broader than this. The book was certainly
not written for the average or common man, the Xiao Ren. A couple of centuries
later (or over the next couple of centuries) the Zhouyi appears to have been
reedited for the benefit of a somewhat larger readership. Technical terms, such as
those used by the m ilitary, appear to have been updated. And there may have
been some attrition in the text as images and prognostications failed at im portant
moments and got themselves deleted. This last would account for some of the
unevenness in text length and the varying balance between the images and the
prognostications. It might also be a safe assumption that, throughout the E arly
Zhou, as long as the kingdom rem ained centralized under the authority of a
strong sovereign, there were not a lot of unauthorized editions floating around.
8

So I might begin an approach by assuming that confidence in the reader's
ability to understand the text was justifiably at an all time high. The circle of those
with access to the work was small enough that for a time one could even ask the
authors what the heck they meant. This question is important because, in all forms
of divination, there is a huge difference between the understanding required of a
diviner and that required of a simple querent. The diviner needs to be able to
understand, and to be fluent in, the entire language of his craft. The querent needs
only to try and comprehend what is explained to him about a single phrasing of
the language. The astrologer needs to be conversant in all twelve signs of the
zodiac, while the querent is only looking at one in twelve of these. The diviner, in
other, words is always at least one level higher above the question or questioner.
With this in mind, it becomes a little easier to assume a somewhat higher
level of intellectual or cultural sophistication when looking for the authors’ intent
with respect to embedded meanings and the intended readership. When Waley
wrote "peasant interpretation texts" I doubt that anyone even bothered to ask:
"What peasants?" So now when we look