insightful. In this
group fall certain Gua dimensions, such as the Jiao (or Reversed) Gua, twenty-
eight pairs of the Pang Tong (or Opposite) Gua, and the sixteen Hu (or Nuclear)
Gua. The assignment of twelve of the Gua to the Twelve Moons may have been
part of the repertoire of the Zhouyi authors (see 19.0), but this was taken much
further in the Han with assignments to very complex calendar correspondences
and the Tw elve Earthly Branches. The Luo Shu, or the Writing from the River
Luo, and the He Tu, or the Yellow River Map, were developed in this era, at least
in narrative form. The San C ai, or the Three Talents (of Heaven, Man and Earth;
Tian, Ren and Di) were imported to the Yi from the culture at large and assigned
to three pairs among the six lines. The Hu G ua, or Nuclear Hexagrams, were
added. Certain of the Yao De (or Line Characteristics) were developed here from
scratch, such as Sheng Jian Yao (or Rising and Falling Lines); Governing and
Constituting Rulers (i.e. crucial lines in a Gua); and Yao Bi  (or Lines Holding
Together) in either cheng (receiving) or cheng (resting upon) relationships.
Other tracts elaborated on dimensions which were new in the Wings, such as
Zhong, Centrality; Dang,
 Appropriateness; Zheng, Correctness (Appropriateness
in a Ruling Line); Fen, Equitable Apportionment; and Ying, Correspondence, also
called Resonance. Of the  Zhouyi  dimensions, they made several advances in the
understanding of the Gua Ming (or the Hexagram Names), the Yao W ei (or the
Line Positions), the Ban Xiang (or the H alf Images), and the Gua Bian (or the
Hexagram Changes). And yet, like the Wing authors before them, they seem to
have missed the Zhi G ua subtleties (interpolations) as a source for the Yao C i
images, and the Fan Yao (See Dimensions, Gua Bian) dimension entirely.
In the first two centuries of the Han we also begin to see references to what
are called the San Yi, or Three Yi’s. These begin in the Zhouli, a record of Rites of
the Zhou, in which the Grand Diviner (Da Bu) is said to be charged 
with three
versions of the Changes: the Lian Shan (or Paired M ountains), the Gui Cang (or
Reverting to the Hidden, which for some goofy reason is often translated Flow
and Return to the Womb and Tomb) and the Zhouyi (or our Changes of Zhou).
There was a great deal of speculation in the Han on the first two of these versions
(which are lost), by Huan Tan (in Xin Lun , a treatise), Zi Chun, Shan Haijing and
Zheng Xuan (127-200). The combined speculation tells an absurd tale: the Lian
Shan belonged either to Fu Xi or the Xia dynasty, began its sequence with the
Gua of Gen, and had a text of eighty thousand characters; while the Gui Cang
belonged either to Huang Di or the Shang dynasty, began its sequence with the
Gua of Kun, and had a text of forty-three thousand characters. Later opinions of
these speculations vary from groundless (Kong Yingda, 574-648) to worthy of
investigation (Gu Yanwu, 1613-1682). Some scholars have suggested that the
first two were simply textless divination methods. To those interested in the Xian
Tian, or the sequence of the Primal Heaven, the more intriguing of the two is the
520

Gui Cang because it begins with one of the endpoints of this sequence. But this
is more likely to have followed a sequence like Kun-Qian-Xun-Zhen-Li-Kan-Dui-
Gen; or Kun-Xun-Li-Dui-Qian-Zhen-Kan-Gen , two versions of “The Family” Ba
Gua order. I have not yet seen it suggested that these two versions may have
been related to the working notes of the school of diviners who authored the
Zhouyi, which may never have been made public but w ould have been known
about in certain influential circles around the throne. They may also have been
large collections of shell and bone divinatory texts, phrases and omens somehow
adapted to being accessed by Yarrow stalks.
For one more side-bar before returning to the next school: the Li J i, or the
(Confucian) Book of Rites was compiled in the first century BCE by Dai Sheng. In
a