stake
But this kind of thing differs from happiness
12.4x Having higher purpose is not a mistake:
The intentions (are) carried out
There are higher laws than the kingdom’s, higher mandates and purposes than kings
either give or follow. There may never be social pressure to step up or reach up and
grasp these. Almost all the rewards are given for being some bland kind of normal,
so praise and support will not be pouring in. But deep inside the mammalian brain,
a mind wants its social support. Not selling out has a steep price as well. The person
of conscience, the one who is able to give or withdraw consent, who claims the right
to civilly disobey, who looks more often to the next generations than to the next
appointment, is not overwhelmed with rewards. The transformation of humankind
is called the great work and not the big fun. But higher purpose is not about gain,
it is that you must give and can’t stop. Happiness will measure things elsewhere.
128

12.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.5: regrets pass, loss or gain, to go is promising)
Easing out of separation
The mature human being’s promise:
This passes, that passes
As surely as mulberry seedlings
12.5x The mature human being’s promise:
The position (is) correct (and) appropriate
The end of a difficult time is approaching. What has rotted and decayed begins to be
known as compost and mulch. Now the small things that are growing are the young
and their hopes for a better tomorrow. As each full set of seasons will bring its own
lessons to bear, and several bring history’s teachings, the flexible young one is now
given learnings to lean on, about what went wrong in the past. Against the ill winds
that we now know are out there, we stake our hopes for a future. Mulberry seedlings
might pass in a couple of ways, but we want them to outgrow the need for the stakes
and this means living and breathing, provisional plans, a healthy mix of the firm and
the flexible. Later a grove of strong trees might even change the climate. For today
through twenty years hence, life is reconstitution: the roots are fed well enough now.
12.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.6: offering counsel, weeping, sniveling, no harm)
Overcoming the separation
At first denial, then rejoicing
12.6x Separation ends (and is) then overcome:
(But) how could this be sustained?
The wheel of fortune has come back around, spun off a new group of bright-eyed
young sages, carried away an old load of dimwits, with their baggage of hope and
despair, their little deaths and rebirths. Neither will joy last forever, although from
what it has just undergone it can learn to last a bit longer, assuming some lessons
in expectation and gratitude. The good and the true will not hold themselves erect.
A higher order is endless work, as life is work against heat-death and falling apart.
Have we learned yet why up and down are so oft interchanged? To look first for the
longer trend and a larger arrangement? And above all, why do we seek our sec urity
in things that we don’t think will change? Change is so foreign and scary to people
they would choose endless boredom, or endless damnation, if only these be eternal.
129

12, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 11, Tai, Interplay
qian gua (inverse): 11, Tai, Interplay
jiao gua (reverse): 11, Tai, Interplay
hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 7th Moon (Sep)
12, Notes
* 12.0 Pi is often translated ‘obstruction’ but this misses the point entirely. Here
the two forces are going their own separate ways: the problem is that they are not
interfering with each other.
* 12.0 The inferior person (fei r en) is not the same as the common or the average
person ( xiao ren), although the Tuan Zhuan  and Xiao Xiang  fail to make this
distinction. The latter term is value neutral, the former is value negative. Although
the net effect of an excess of commonness is still Pi, or entropy, this is attributable
more to simp