s problem)
The withered poplar* bears flowers
An older lady finds herself a young gentleman to marry
No blame, no praise
28.5x The withered poplar bears flowers:
(But) how could this last?
* (An) older lady (and) young male companion:
So inviting (to) condemnation
Good for our lovely, plucky old lady! With wrinkle goop and war paint, and some
would say not enough else, she goes on the hunt and brings home a healthy, young
buck. How discreet can you be when you kick up your heels like that? There will be
no children of course, and no praise from the horrified gossips, and one day he will
move on somewhat wiser. In great times life knows its allies, sometimes by warmth.
The value of such an arrangement is not so commonly known, but its worth is clear
to those so arranged. Why even care what a gossip will think? How could this last?
Can it be more than one final fling if the flower saps the tree’s strength and renewal
is not from the roots? A last hurrah or maybe hooray! Why not ask this one instead:
Who dares to measure the time? And is the eternal really all that it’s rumored to be?
28.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.6: encountering with those horns, embarrassing)
Too much to wade into, immersing one’s head
Brutal
Make no mistakes
28.6x Too much to wade into comes into bad luck:
But not deserving blame
You cannot get more surrounded by greatness than when the great stream crosses
your village. Confronted by rising waters, already over his head, he has no time to
plead for his fortune or fate. This will no doubt be a moving experience. And the
choice to be made is so simple: to keep life’s temple afloat, or feed it to the fishes.
If he has not learned how to swim, or build a boat out of wishes, he has just failed
his last and best test. His passing w ill at least be dramatic and maybe even heroic.
But life in the long run will profit without him, as folks of the future grow flippers
which are also useful as feet. Imagine this is a speed learning course, with current
events getting swifter. He is out of his depth, or in too deep, in way over his head,
and in the deep end of the gene pool. This is what he’s made of: there is no blame.
225

28, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth
qian gua (inverse): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
jiao gua (reverse): 61, Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 62, 56, 55, 30
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
28, Notes
* 28.1 Both the meaning and the humor in this l ine seem to have gone over almost
everybody’s head. One is cushioning one’s valuables from below, but it’s the roof
which is about to come down. This line is about acting upon misplaced caution, as
its fan y ao, 43.1, is about misplaced incaution or vigor. This could be similar in
meaning to our more modern “rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic.”
* 28.5 The word Yang2, translated willow at 28.2, can refer to the whole willow
family (salicaceae), including willow, cottonwood, aspen, poplar, etc. The family
thrives in wet and flooded areas. I’m not certain that the authors were oberving
this, but the normal reproduction of salicaceae is by cloning or suckering; sexual
reproduction is exceptional in this family.
28, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Briah of Yetzirah
* Tarot: Queen of Swords (a knighting ceremony, a name of power)
* Astrology: Gemini Ascending, Mutable Air
28, Quotations
* ... they content themselves with dark surmisings of nature’s magic language,
playing on fancy as a child might play on his father’s magic wand. They know not
what forces they have as vassals, what worlds are bound to obey them.
—Novalis, The Novices of Sais
* Now we are once again at the limits of our wits, where the minds of you mortals
go overboard. Why do you make common cause with us if you cannot follow
through? You want to fly and are not proof to dizziness? Did we force ourselves
on you, or you on us? —Goethe, Faust
* These are the times that try men’s souls. —Thoma