all pattern.
The boundaries here define starting points, or places to return to. Their intent is not the
compression of meaning but rather its expansion into the remaining dimensions: to open the
mind, not to fill it up. The words are meant to be stimuli, not merely responses. They
describe, they do not determine. They are names for perspectives, but what is viewed from
these perspectives remains a moving pageant and hopefully a surprise.
Wang Bi (226-249) of the Yi Li  school (long before it was named Yi Li ) was
concerned with the process of getting to the core meanings of the names through the ever-
growing clusters of words, a process known as Zheng Ming  or Rectification of Names.
Shaughnessy (1983) translates Wang’s Zhouyi lueli on the subject of Sao Xiang (Sweeping
Out the Images) at some length and this warrants inclusion here:
Images are that which express ideas and language i
s that which illuminates images.
There is nothing like images for understanding ideas and nothing li ke language for
understanding images. Because language is born of images, it is possible to follow language
in order to see the images. And because images are born of ideas, it is possible to follow
images in order to see the ideas. Ideas are understood through images, images made clear
through language.
Therefore, since language is what is used to explicate images, when you have gotten the
image, forget the language; since images are what is used to fix ideas, when you have gotten
the idea, forget the image. ... If the meaning is ‘strength,’ what need is there for ‘horse?’ If
the category is ‘obedience,’ what need is there for ‘cow?’ If the line corresponds to
‘obedience,’ what need is there for Kun to be ‘cow;’ and if the line corresponds with
‘strength,’ what need is there for Qian then to be ‘horse?’
And yet, there are those who establish Qian as ‘horse.’ If correlating the text with the
hexagram, there is ‘horse’ but no Qian, then artificial theories propagate and it is difficult to
draw lines. If the ‘internal form’ is insufficient, they follow it with the ‘hexagram change.’
And if the changed text is insufficient, they push it further with the ‘five phases.’ Once the
source has been lost, the cleverness becomes ever more intricate. If [such cleverness] is
allowed to go unchecked, there is no place to get the meaning, and this is
 all because of
9

concentrating on the image while forgetting the idea. Forget the images and seek the ideas;
the meaning will then be apparent. [p. 5.]
This approach has its strengths in terms of finding the center of the territory, or the
gravitational center of a cluster of meanings. But it has two problems as well: 1) If one is
premature in dismissing the words and the images one runs the risk of being stuck with a
wrong or peripheral idea as a core meaning. Wang Bi himself can often be found in this
predicament. And, 2) To confine oneself to the center misses the whole point of being in the
center. Focus, in the Yijing, is not the same thing as narrow mindedness or tunnel vision.
Concentration shares an etymological root with concentric: a plurality which shares a
center, much as nested sets do. The center ( zhong) has its greatest value in its being the
locus which is nearest to all of the options. This makes right and left more handy, not things
to be avoided. To be stuck in the center is to forgo a richness and diversity: thereby does
one’s path become a rut. Or imagine a gem with only one facet. Only a mobius strip does
this and these useless things go nowhere. On a gem the facets face apart, and no two face
the same direction. Yet most face also into the center.
The Yijing is meant to teach wisdom, and there is much more to the getting of wisdom
than the getting of the lingo, but this is where to start in a book. And so it is a good thing to
look for the center in the midst of a cluster of words. Two other images may help, and both
of these are related to probability laws: In certain athletic competition