n at least
partially developed or fleshed out and had undergone a degree of testing.
The next phase of your project began. It was not long before you realized
that another level of structure would be needed: a set of associations for each of
509

the six line positions. Some of these you derived from the six-line diagrams which
featured the line in question in its structure. But most of the associations were
assigned according to progressions from bottom to top, seen as movements from
past to future, foot to head, subject to master and subjective to objective. It took
weeks to develop this scaffolding, and then months more to return to the overall
diagrams and add the insights gleaned from these new developments.
Throughout this early period, apprentices had been joining the congress and
growing familiar with the task at hand. It was becoming increasingly clear that
the Duke’s early prediction was true: the work would indeed span generations. It
was a young apprentice who offered the last crucial element of the structure. The
interpolation from the original to the resultant diagram already indicated a specific
direction. But there was a relationship or resonance between this vector and the
one which was coming from the opposite direction, when the resultant diagram
was the original. It was as though they were two travelers on the same path, but
each one going to where the other had come from. Where they met, they would
share their stories. This dimension would become more than half as important as
the Duke of Zhou’s Changing Line insight, and would help to formulate the text,
the vocabulary and especially the tone, of many a line. The first development of
the Changing Line texts proceeded much like that of the diagrams.
It dawned gradually on the whole of your group that a consensus among
you was not a goal worth pursuing. You were developing something very
different than a school of thought. The text was already beginning to take shape:
to one among your number this work was poetry, to another, a m ythos, to
another, wise counsel, to another, religion, to another, language itself, to another, a
primer for the ethical education of royalty. How could it be all of these things?
And what else could it do? You discussed this at length with the Duke. It had not
been very difficult to help him past the glamour and the superstition that always
seemed to shroud your guild from the public gaze. He understood that yours was
a healing art. He was after all both one of you and your leader. His demand was
simple: if the work could meet all o
f the demands of its intended function as a
divination manual, then not only did he have no objections to the work being
broader than this in scope, he would encourage it, provided only that, were the
hidden things to be brought to light, they would be cause for appreciation
instead of resentment. And so you even had permission to educate against
determinism, to suggest that the whole point of looking ahead was to be able to
avert bad pronouncements and capitalize or improve upon good ones. You could
make the advice look exactly like a prediction, and yet imply all the choice you
wanted to in the alternative, which may be described by its absence. You were
even permitted to make a reader laugh, especially when that would help put the
changes into perspective. You could have some fun with puns and irony and
double entendres. You could tease the readers with what looked like cliches and
silly omens, and leave only the subtlest of hints of a much deeper meaning. And
you were more than welcome to take a page or two from the life of Zhou Gong
himself and to set forth the life lessons which would help King Cheng's sons and
grandsons to become wiser rulers.
510

The growing of the line meanings, which preceded their pruning back
through the process of divination, was to take many decades. By the time this
phase was completed and the testing underway, the Duke of Zhou, and you, and
all of the founding mem bers