Better to hunker down in a tunnel, then move
towards the light. What is he waiting for now? Out is simply the way that’s not in.
86

05.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.5: Lord Yi’s daughter married, the way to happiness)
Waiting at wine and food
Persistence is promising
05.5x (At) wine (and) food, persistence (is) promising:
Making use of the mean(while) correctly
The meanwhile is not that mean after all. In an interval of less stress, a calm center
between busier times, a peace between troubles and wars, toasting and feasting and
even rebreeding get started. It is not a down time at all. There is no need to wait for
old reasons. So the sage arrives half a day early, all agog at the food and spices of
life, all that forgotten fun, getting first fingers in all of the pies, making sure that the
wine is just right. Where else should sagacity lead now? They say that life is not a
rehearsal. This rewards presence, not patience. Tomorrow’s meal is just not half
as satisfying today. This is not a pause between times, but a climax all on its own,
not a calm before some storm, but the center of the weather, and not some stop on
the way to one’s going. There is simply no good reason to have an inferior time.
05.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.6: rain at last, respect qualities already achieved)
Entering into a pit
With no invitations extended to visitors, three people arrive
To attend to them will end in good fortune
05.6x With no invitations extended, visitors arrive
To attend to them will end in good fortune:
Although not a proper situation
Still less than a major mishap
Waiting properly also waits for the things not expected, and is seldom disappointed.
You had all that time on your hands to get ready, even when you knew not what for,
but all that you did was long out the window for something that had not yet arrived.
Now come what may has. You might think you could have kept house in less pitiful
shape, but waiting does not work well in the past, and there is no could have been.
What’s not done’s not done. The question now is how quickly to learn, since now
is a meanwhile too, even during the knocks at the door. There is still time to salvage
some dignity and get a good attitude ready. This is where the guests will most want
their welcome. Of course every host in the sociable world will apologize for their pit.
At least you will not have to lie now. Clear a quick trail and receive them as honored.
87

05, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 35, Jin, Expansion
qian gua (inverse): 06, Song, Contention
jiao gua (reverse): 06, Song, Contention
hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
05, Notes
*05.1 There are two oblique references here. The suggestion to clean out the well
at the deepest part of a drought, when the water table is lowest, is a Zhi Gua and
Fan Yao reference to 48.1. The pit of a house refers to what is coming at 05.6.
A poor family might live in a hovel, often called a pit house, dug halfway into the
ground and covered over. An ill-kept house referred to as a pit is a also common
metaphor in other languages.
05, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chokmah in Briah
* Tarot: Two of Cups
* Astrology: Uranus in Water
05, Quotations
* An inquisitive professor once visited Nan-In to pay his respects, but he could
hardly bring himself to stop talking. Nan-In served him tea, pouring the cup full
and not stopping. “It is overfull,” cried the professor, “no more will go in!”
“Like this cup,” said Nan-In, “you are full of your opinions and speculations.
I cannot show you Zen unless you first empty your cup.” —Muju
* And hap’ly Fate’s a Theist-word
Subject to human chance and change. —The Kasidah
* When tomorrow comes, think tomorrow’s thoughts. —Arabic proverb
* If pleasures are greatest in anticipation, just remember that this is also true of
trouble. —Elbert Hubbard
* We love to expect, and when expectation is either disappointed or gratified, we
want to be