e shadow no more. The raptor, once
plucked, looks a lot like a chicken: a really nasty, inedible chicken. Of course this is
not just a fowl, but the symbol at the center of focus, and the excuse to stay unfree.
297

40, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members
qian gua (inverse): 39, Jian, Impasse
jiao gua (reverse): 03, Zhun, Rallying
hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 15, 52, 36, 22
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
40, Notes
* 40.4 Mu can mean toe or thumb. The release in Chinese archery is different
than in the west: the string is held with the thumb, which in turn is secured by a
finger. This is now known as the Mongolian Release, but it’s more ancient than
that. In the west, three fingers are used and no thumb. In this case, if Mu is thumb,
one is not letting go of the string, or else a tense release is fouling the shot. But
knowing the authors of the Zhouyi it could also be a play on the ambiguity of the
term - your thumb might as well be a toe for all the finesse of your release.
40, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Samech; Path between Tipareth and Chesed (Trad: Ys-Tp)
* Tarot: Temperance (Tempering, Timing, The spell’s ‘casting’)
* Astrology: Ninth House, Mutable Fire, Sagittarius (note archery ref.’s)
40, Quotations
* Peace, sisters, the charm’s wound up. —Shakespeare, Macbeth
* ... but let him come ... plunder whatever dregs that in the ceaseless strife of his
staunch body have not found time as yet to turn from flesh and bone into pure
spirit, lightning, deeds and joy. The archer has fooled you, Death, he’s squandered
all your goods. —Nikos Kazantzakis, The Odyssey
* There can be no real freedom without the freedom to fail. —Eric Hoffer
* Wild liberty breeds iron conscience; natures with great impulses have great
resources and return from far. —Emerson
* To change your idea of the world is the crux of sorcery.
—Carlos Castaneda, Tales of Power
* The jailor can’t go home until the prisoner is free. —Tom Brady
* The prisoner is free. —Kalahari bushman death song.
* Timing has a lot to do with the outcome of a rain dance. —Unknown
* The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.
—Gandhi
298

GUA 41, SUN3, DECREASING
 
  Binary 110 001 = 48; Dui below, Gen above
41.X, Overall Image
At the foot of the mountain is a marsh
Decreasing
The noble young one, accordingly,
rules out resentments (and) restrains desires
The water level is low. A mountain towers above, its image held in the pool as a heart
holds up a hope. The mountain seems twice as high, the pool seems twice as empty.
Only half of an offering sits at the base of the shrine. The flower gives up its petals
and attends to developing seeds. The young noble works on his character, giving up
this and that, distilling life down to what matters the most. His thrift is extended even
to feelings. He fixes the smallest of leaks to save liquid, the resources that he needs.
If he must lose, he can start by losing the unwanted things, his defects and excesses,
troubles and losses, resentments and cravings. This way poverty becomes simplicity.
41.0, Decreasing
Be true
Outstanding opportunity
Nothing is wrong
But it calls for persistence
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
How is this applied?
A pair of simple rice baskets may be used for the offering
To give a thing up is not always a loss if it goes to where it is needed and it comes
from where it is not. Nor is surrender always defeat, nor thrift an ungenerous way.
Young sprouts and seedlings are topped and pruned but are not diminished thereby.
A sacrifice is supposed to cost less than its worth. Two small bowls, even if filled
with what is on hand and not needed, might be sacred to someone else. Even if one
is half full and the other half empty, there will be a full measure somewhere. And if
good spirits top these both off, half-measures can be seen in new ways. Something
wonderful happens when economy again means thrift. Whatever is left o