ral heart, to chill the
higher minds. So why do the neck and shoulders still seize, and need all those rubs?
Why does this still happen so often, as though the excess of caution and fear were
still there? No great or lesser ape would write letters, then tear them up. A monkey’s
business is not thinking over or through. Better to hear a no and get on to the new.
31.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.6: resourceful retreat, nothing not advantageous)
Moved in one’s jawbones and tongue
31.6x Moved in one’s jawbones (and) tongue:
Gushing (with) oral persuasion
No heaving bosoms or throbbing loins here! The silver-tongued devil talks small,
smooth and fast. He prattles away in the tavern, with a fine, saucy wench on each
knee. But take away the gestures, the flattery and the fashions and not much with
substance remains. There are no intriguing voids and silences left: these were all
quickly filled in. There are no tempting depths to dive into here. Though some facts
get stated, in something like logical order, there is more misdirection than purpose.
Maybe they each might go home alone, to set down their thoughts about love and
attraction. But this will be all that survives of this night. So what is the point of the
exercise? What wild screams of delight could come from these same throats, if they
only came from a lot deeper down. Life wants so much to live more than halfway.
243

31, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 41, Sun, Decreasing
qian gua (inverse): 32, Heng, Continuity
jiao gua (reverse): 41, Sun, Decreasing
hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
31, Notes
* 31.0 This Gua uses eros and libido as a general metaphor for the will to interact
with the world and live a fertile existence.
* 31.4 This line is too often misunderstood in its “easier” translation of: “Friends
are following your thoughts.” This is usually thought to refer to a superstitious
belief related to telepathy or subliminal communication. What the line is really
saying is: to the extent that one’s personal orientation in life is chaotic, one’s
relationships will reflect this randomness. This idea is especially important in the
fan yao, 39.4, where the su bject is in more of a guidance or leadership position.
Xiao Xiang 31.4 uses the word Guang, exemplary.
31, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Briah of Atziluth
* Tarot: Queen of Pentacles
* Astrology: Virgo Ascending, Mutable Earth
31, Quotations
* No, one body does not diminish beneath another. There is no amorous oil to
lose. The woman bathing in her blue pool renews not her flesh but her readiness.
—John Hawkes
* Eunuchs, abortive Platonists and priests speak always very wisely about love.
—Theodore Spencer
* Chastity is the most unnatural of the sexual perversions. —De Gourmont
* All argument will vanish before one touch of nature. —George Coleman
* If our elaborate and dominating bodies are given to us to be denied at every
turn, if our nature is always wrong and wicked, how ineffectual we are - like
fishes not meant to swim. —Cyril Connolly
* All real living is meeting. —Martin Buber
* To be fruitful the spirit must be wife. Spouse is the noblest title of the spirit,
nobler than virgin. For a man to receive the Divine within him is good, and in
receiving he is virgin. But for the divine to be fruitful in him is still better.
—Meister Eckhart
244

GUA 32, HENG2, CONTINUITY
 
  Binary 011 100 = 28; Xun below, Zhen above
32.X, Overall Image
Thunder and wind
Continuity
The noble young one, accordingly,
makes a stand without changing bearings
The storm seems like drastic change to those confined to one place: first it comes
and then it goes. But the storm merely moves, it wanders the earth, always behaving
like climate, always a timely expression of timeless seasons. Its energy conserved
through the changes, it is never really exhausted. It connects to the ever-enduring
and so it never runs out of motion. Even the doldrums and the motionless eyes of
the storms a