as their prancing and strutting suggests. This is cultural centrism and
snobbery, it is Fellowship With Others in the Clan (13.2). They are assuming too
much about the ancient mental world being unrecognizably different from ours
and about the primitiveness of its inhabitants. The authors did not walk on their
knuckles and grunt and think dim thoughts with australopithecine brains. And
they did not serve a king who would tolerate having his intelligence insulted. It is
not always true that that the older a thought is the more primitive it must be.
Some o
f humanity's wisest and most profound ideas are simple observations. As
much as I would like to claim that modern man is incapable of the superstition and
ignorance that is attributed to these poor people, I still live in a tiny rural
mountain town with its requisite infestation of fundamentalist Christians. But, as
will be the subject of the next section, the Zhouyi was not written by - or for - the
masses. For now, I want to apply a variant of Occam's law of parsimony to the
ancient Chinese culture as a whole. Outside of details of the culture which we
can verify as being wildly different from ours, I think it best that we use what we
know of contemporary neolithic and bronze age cultures and otherwise assume
the smallest amount of significant difference between ourselves and the culture
which produced the Zhouyi. I will assume a common substratum of the humanity
that we have shared for over a hundred millenia. I will assume that they w ere, on
35

a broad scale, becoming post-mythological in their stage of cultural evolution and
not simply concrete and magical. I will assume a degree of self-awareness and a
capacity, at least for some people within the culture, for understanding the ethical
attributes of justice, uprightness and sincerity. And to anyone who would make
the claim that the tenth century BCE is just too early in the human story for the
development and writing down of explicit wisdom, I would simply answer: read
the Upanishads .
Looking at the Wrong Subculture
No human culture is simple, monolithic or homogeneous. Further, human
beings, although deserving or in need of equal rights and opportunities at the
start, are certainly not equal in merit or in understanding. As in all eras, there was
probably a wide spectrum of degrees of comprehension across the populations of
both the Shang and the Zhou, and so if you are going to talk about beliefs, much
depends on whose beliefs you are talking about. The Zhouyi was not written by
the ancient Chinese culture, nor was it written by the Zhou people, or for them
either. It was written within and for a narrow sub-culture, the c ircle around the
throne. The king was the center of this and had all of the final words. The others
functioned as his counselors and may have been a mix of diviners ( bu and shi),
shamans (wu of both sexes) and scribes. The authors of the Zhouyi are likely to
have made up a still narrower subset of this group, called upon specifically to
author a new oracle to serve a new age under a new Mandate of Heaven, and
were possibly kept separate and distinct from those still informing the king using
the older, time-tested methods. They may have been given a great deal more
artistic license and freedom for a time. They would have been summoned
according to their reputations, for their esoteric knowledge, their skill as diviners,
their facility with images and their grasp of the language. I am going 
to use the
term Wu S hi, shaman-scribe, to name these people as a group, even though the
Siberian term “shaman” has a number of misleading connotations, thanks to mass
superstition, like foaming around the mouth and flopping around on the floor. I
surely do not  mean to imply that the Wu S hi were as independent of the
sovereign's will as the sorcerer is wont to be. I will also use the term Wu Xian ,
shamanic congress, gathering or collective, to name their guild, which I am
inclined to view as something akin to