t be that great of a goal,
no more than just wishing for luck, so what we are really asking for here is a lot of
humbling work and the wisdom to find and follow the best examples and teachers.
And great ends are often a long way away, so there is the question of pace. These
will make a distinction between boldness alone and boldness that leads to success.
Only the few achieve greatness, but the noble effort to live well is worth a life too.
329

46.M, Key Words
Ascend, climb, mount, improve, upgrade; to rise above, build up, make up, add up
Ambition, boldness, opportunism, preferment, taking of advantages, surmounting
Developed proficiency, skill, mastery, competence, training, elevation, graduation
Practice, education, edification; accretion, assimilation, constitution, construction
Self-betterment, improvement, personal growth & bests; raising / rising standards
Elevate, promote, overcome; graduated task; paced efforts, measuring of progress
46.G, From the Glossary
sheng1 (to) advance (on, upon), promote, ascend, climb, arise, rise up, rise above,
move upward, go up, step up, improve, mount, lift up, accumulate, save; issue
forth (s, ed, ing); (a, the) advance, advancement, promotion, improvement, ascent,
climb, step, increment (s); a measure of capacity; [to invest in potential energy]
46.T, Tuan Zhuan
The flexible uses the time to advance
Adapting and also accepting
The firm (is) central and resonant
This is, accordingly, very fulfilling
Productive to encounter a mature human being,
Do not worry:
Own the rewards
The southern expedition (is) promising:
The intentions (are) carried out
330

46.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.1: pull up thatch grass roots, by cluster, expedite)
Well-favored advance
Great opportunity
46.1x Well-favored advance (is) a great opportunity:
A higher (and) unifying purpose
He begins the push upwards and pursues the objectives he wants. To the surprise
of some, he encounters broad welcome instead of resistance. He is offered a hand
and leg up. They recognize this up above as the promise of youth and gladly offer
their aid. The attitude is the thing. The stones which require the seedling to turn in
its path will one day anchor great roots. The young one seizes his day. Selfishness
is not itself a bad thing: it only gets its bad name from those who practice it poorly.
Sometimes we give best by taking, exalting provider as well as provision. Nobody
asked that he do this alone. No rule says you can’t make good use of your friends.
Thus he takes his gifts and applies them, making excellent use of people he knows.
Of course this encouragement grows a little more rare once he surpasses the middle.
46.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.2: expressing modesty, persistence is promising)
Sincerity precedes the real reward
when offering the modest spring sacrifice
Nothing is wrong
46.2x Nine second’s sincerity
Will find happiness
He asks the divine and the spirits for intercession on his behalf. Not only this, but
he also doesn’t bring very much to the altar. While he knows that he can do without  
more than he wants to give up now, he would rather save this for startup and seed
for his venture. What kind of modest is this? While folks in the temple in town are
offering seed to the lord of the sky this spring, this one is out in the field, reverently
planting his seed in the ground. This sort of modest is goal-directed and thoughtful.
This modest spring offering will allow for autumn’s more generous rites, when time
is much better suited to giving and gratitude both. What is sacrificed now will grow
no greater, not into bushels of gifts. It’s about the next step, not the last, and what
really needs doing now. Spring is time to get growing. Spirits want him to do this.
331

46.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.3: militia likely to transport fatalities, misfortune)
Advancing upon an empty town
46.3x Advancing upon an empty town:
(This is) no place for doubts
This