tegrity there will be suffering*
And not much reward in having somewhere to go
By right of birth comes the will and the sense to reach out for a good life. Youth errs
and stumbles, but as with young bones, first roots and green branches, the shock of
having to learn will be absorbed in the bending. The importance of living is its own
affirmation, with heaven’s permissive assent; senseless living is also permitted, for
those who may choose denial. Being true to the gifts one is born with, living a life
of sincerity and integrity, is not any guarantee against bad luck and ugly surprises.
Even truth is not always success. But life has learned that these traits will improve
the odds, that working with a natural merit and practicing a natural good can be two
of the best rules of thumb one can live by. And so one’s inner being might already
know what it means to be true. And life has also learned that living an insincere life,
full of contrivance and guile, with parts of yourself at odds with your nature, will
tend to diminish a life, or cost too much precious time in defending illusions and
errors. Innocence might not have all things thought through, but thought is not all.
The pilgrim who still seeks his heaven has looked everywhere but at his own feet.
203

25.M, Key Words
Lacking, avoiding, no + presumption, pretension, recklessness, falseness, delusion
Artlessness, guilelessness; naturalness, simplicity, sincerity, a natural intelligence
Natural gifts, instinctive goodness, spontaneity, integrity, innocence, inner voices
Pure motives, openness, surprise, wonder, original mind, faith in innate goodness
Credulity, vulnerability, susceptibility, accessibility; good faith; the noble savage
Presumption of innocence, benefit of doubt; issues of confidence, trust & honesty
25.G, From the Glossary
wu2 (to be, being, is, am, are, will be, exists, remains) (has, have, had, having,
with) (do, does, did ) (there is/are/will be ) (it/this/these is/are ) no, not, nothing,
never, rarely, seldom, no longer, without, with no; but (no, not); there, this, these
(is, are) no, not, nothing (of); not (a, the); (to be ) absent, gone, non-existent; des-
titute, wanting, in vain; lacking in; free of/from; avoided, devoid, void, deprived,
regardless, instead (of), rather than, despite; not much, no longer; not being; (the)
least, minimum, (so, very) little; no matter; no ... done; neither ... nor, whether ... or
not, without ... or; (to) (simply) lack, want; avoid, escape; not have, own/possess/
have no/less/fewer; find/leave/use no; do no, not do, do nothing to (s, -ed, -ing);
(will, would) not (be); do(es) not exist; were there no; has/have gone off; will/
would not be(come); (a, the) absence/lack/want of, avoidance of; nothing, emp-
tiness, non-being/existence, no-thing-ness; un-, ill-, im-, in-, dis-, de-, non-; -less;
don't, do not; used for Wu2, M7180, GSR103i
wang4 (a, the) presumption, pretense, expectation, falseness, duplicity, pretext,
guile, deceit, folly, error, disorder, di sarray, distraction, extravagance, distortion;
(to be) irregu lar, incoherent, presumptuous, pretentious, full of oneself, false,
erroneous, vain, futile, ignorant, fanciful, duplicitous, wild, empty, void, reckless,
entangled, idle, incorrigible, absurd, stupid, wanton, foolish, disorderly, untrue,
embroiled, entangled; falsely, wrongly, foolishly, wantonly; (to) look toward, ex-
pect, hope; assume, presume, pretend (s, ed, ing)
25.T, Tuan Zhuan
Without pretense
Firmness comes from without and becomes master on the inside
Movement with lasting vigor
The firm (is) central and resonant
Great fulfillment (is) according to integrity
Heaven’s higher law
For one without integrity there will be suffering
(And) not (much) reward in having somewhere to go
(While) without pretense there is forward progress
How is this so?
Heaven’s higher law is not protection:
(It is) movement itself!
204

25.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.1: pulling up grass roots, with anothe