lower our expectations too far. The fortunate ones expect others to be
on the kind and ethical side of the average, or expect to turn losses to lessons, and
set aside a dumping place for all those disappointments, somewhere out of the way.
But what of being worthy of trust, and of learning and unlearning to trust ourselves?
We seem born with most of an e thic, a hunger to find what remains to complete it,
and maybe even a conscience. Our ethics are tied to self-interest, and opportunism
by birth. So why not begin with things as they are? Life offers lessons in the order
they need to be learned. To want guarantees is not innocent. Simply promise wisely.
206

25.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.5: biting into dried meat, finding yellow metal)
One without pretense still has afflictions
Do not medicate to bring about well-being
25.5x Lack of pretense itself (is) medicine
(This) does not call for experiments
The body is trying to say something, the brain has no final words yet. A disease is
the start of an adaptation to the stresses along life’s way, stresses often developed
when the mind takes us far from our paths. Its favorite roots of guilt or fatigue or
shame or self-indulgence are sunk into places that mind refuses to heed and keep
clean, where ego refuses to know spirit’s sources, or abstract thoughts get lodged
in the flesh to fester: foreign conditions to feed foreign forms. T he illness which
has no such roots will tend to run a shorter course. An innocent following feelings
might wander into a dark place like this. A healer or an empath might take on the
illness of others. Let these be. Roots that feed an illness require a will to have one
and a lot of work to develop. The healer’s best cure will be a bath in water and light.
25.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.6: seize and bind them, sovereign offers sacrifice)
Without pretensions, yet advance brings suffering
This is not a direction with merit
25.6x Without pretense’s behavior:
Going too far leads to crisis
Flawless adventure was never a part of the promise: it was not that kind of promise.
To be without pretensions might mean falling prey to crafty surprises, or falling in
with the wrong crowd, or falling to the unseen forces. Sincerity is no guarantee that
uprightness will lead to success, or that right action will lead to good fortune. That
kind of promise smells more like bait. Success is not one’s reward for being sincere
or true. In being true and sincere, one simply looks for good signs to act or not act.
And with this being more like a process than a single moment in time, minds and
directions can change. Innocence is a way to learn and unlearn, not an instrument
to make things work or to set the world straight. Even when you are righteous, or
even merely right, the guardians and protectors of justice just do not answer to you.
207

25, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 46, Sheng, Advancement
qian gua (inverse): 26, Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
jiao gua (reverse): 34, Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
hu gua (nuclear): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
25, Notes:
* 25.0 As it is pointed out in several ways in several lines to follow, the converse
of this is no t true: to live one’s life with integrity does not guarantee success.
Things happen without reason or purpose, although many reasons are made up in
retrospect. But a life lived simply to learn is superior to a life of pretending to
know.
25, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Geburah in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Five of Swords
* Astrology: Mars in Air
25, Quotations
* Perfect sincerity offers no guarantee. —Zhuangzi
* In the beginner’s mind there are many possibilities. In the expert’s mind there
are few. —Shunryu Suzuki
* An honest man is always a child. —Martial
* A man is not to aim at innocence, any more than he is to aim at hair; but he is
to keep it. —Emerson
* I am too much a skeptic to deny the possibility of anything. —T. H. Huxley
* The qualiti