has a little idea of how the universe works. Invoking often has helped him get
used to some other perspectives. He still rubs his thing for good luck; his idols are
well-fed and shiny. When troubled, he needs but call out to his long-dead savior.
He has so much security now, how will the next step be taken? Truth is too alien
still, and inhuman. Because truth is so very much more than human, humans will
band or huddle together and make sure that this part of truth is not seen. Artifice
and artifact, steps, altars and tables, numbers and letters, words and ideas, become
the ultimate stuff of the world. Trees are illusions, as is anything created more than
a few days before us. What a small world we build here for fewer regrets! Illusory
trees reach out for more world, up for more fire and air, down for water and earth.
409

59.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.3: recurrent adaptations, embarrassing)
Scattering one’s sense of self
No regrets
59.3x Scattering one’s sense of self:
The purpose lies beyond
He defies the toxic ideas that say to explore no further, and is setting himself aside
to learn of a few more perspectives. Much of the search for truth is done from one
point of view, a confusion of transient entities known as the self. Moving through
time, this point becomes a thread or a path. Traced through space, threads become
fabrics and paths become fields. Sometimes this will show order and sometimes a
tangled mess. Within this, where are the boundaries, where are the limits of self?
We reach into family and race, into species, order, phylum and kingdom, into the
stuff of the earth and the stuff of the stars. But this is only what we are if we can
keep ourselves fed. That all is one is not  the end. It is only a better place to begin.
Can we, should we, break open our heads, and let this larger world come through?
59.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao* 06.4: unable to contend, take up a higher purpose)
Scattering those groups
Most promising
Scattering claims the high ground*
This is not commonplace thinking
59.4x Scattering those groups (is) most promising:
Exemplifying maturity
He will not dissolve in dissent or one side of the issue. There isn’t a set of beliefs
which doesn’t leave something out, or defend itself against some part of the truth.
Human belief is parochial, it is narrowed to local objectives. To dissolve into this is
never a perfect solution. One with higher standards will be on his own, lost first in
his own best interest, or maybe a higher purpose. The eclectic mind discriminates,
yet every source may be resource: the fool on the box in the park, or the nut with
the net chasing faeries. Much of use or value might be found printed backwards,
between lines, or even turned inside out. This does not make it worthless. To pick
and choose only the best and move on with the highest grade ore, affiliate lightly,
understand deeply, embrace opposites and paradox: this is mind’s higher ground.
410

59.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.5: youthful inexperience, opportune)
Evanescent as sweat
And that great cry for help
Scatter the royal stockpiles
Nothing is wrong
59.5x The royal stockpiles, (yet) nothing (is) wrong:
(With) the proper dignity
After only a few generations, the steady state of things cannot hold. An end time has
arrived, the focal point collapses. No institution is able to resist the changes forever.
The king abides in his feverish sweat, his cries carried off by the wind, the change
of state from solid into liquid and gas has begun, a newer state of relief, taking out
heat in the process. The timing is perfect for falling apart, for allowing it all to go.
The world does not have to end here, only a human-made structure. If the king has
some grace and dignity left, he may give a few final commands and open the doors
to the granaries, and maybe the door to the vault. If ever he envied that fellow who
lives in the forest, aimlessly tracking up virgin terr