artial
* A man is not to aim at innocence, any more than he is to aim at hair; but he is
to keep it. —Emerson
* I am too much a skeptic to deny the possibility of anything. —T. H. Huxley
* The qualities we have do not make us so ridiculous as those which we affect.
—La Rochefoucauld
* “Thou mayest have deceived subtler ones than I,” said Zarathustra sternly,
“I am not on my guard against deceivers; I have to be without precaution. So
willeth my lot.” —Nietzsche, TSZ #65
* Seek simplicity and distrust it. —A. N. Whitehead
* Life can only be understood backwards, but it must be lived forwards.
—Soren Kierkegaard
* Still the odds fall sweet in favor to an open heart. —Ferron
208

GUA 26, DA4 CHU4, RAISING GREAT BEASTS
 
  Binary 111 001 = 57; Qian below, Gen above
26.X, Overall Image
Heaven dwells in the midst of the mountain
Raising great beasts
The noble young one makes use of large stores of knowledge
of prior ideas and past deeds
With which to develop such character
The lessons of our history and inheritance are as hard won treasures, stored in the
mounds of our culture, kept for their timely use later. All that we have handed down
and maybe some things we’ve forgotten, all that we are heir to, the patents for the
wheel and fire, the methods of agriculture and husbandry, the thoughts and deeds of
the founders, all of this vast, invested legacy is ours now, to carry forth or squander.
A little restraint will keep this potential growing, a sense of place in the scheme of
it all will prepare us. Life grows even more meaningful as we learn that it goes on
without us, because this might give us the notion to become respectable ancestors.
26.0, Raising Great Beasts
Worthwhile to be persistent
To not dine at home
Is promising
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
The legacy of mankind is greater than any man and the best of us stand upon older
achievements. To inherit all of this is a trust that our brightest lights have endowed.
It can be a trust, or simply ours, or our own heirs’ in turn. Some of the generations
will leave the world a better place than they found it, while others might hand down
horrible things, depletion and debt, devastation and unfinished wars, bad laws and
toxic ideas. Some with long vision will invest in the long term and an infrastructure.
Others refuse to look past the next election or payday. It is up to each heir to pick
and choose a bequest for the next generations and even to decide whether or not the
concerns of their heirs will be weighed at all. For centuries of our history, some of
our cultures have held respect for elders or reverence for ancestors in highest regard
as a sacred duty. Yet too few of us truly see the real point in all this: if we, as heirs,
understand the perspective of heirs, if we know it in our hearts and bones, we will
be less inclined to be bad ancestors ourselves. We forget this today. Not dining at
home, and crossing great streams, puts us in a larger world, serving higher powers.
209

26.M, Key Words
Domesticating, taming, civilizing, harnessing, schooling, training, husbandry
Stewardship, trust, legacy, dynasty, foundation, endowment, usufruct, service
Inheritance, responsibility, discipline, restraint, inhibition; investing in potential
Mound building, cultural accumulation; consolidating gains, making t hem work
Banking, investment, conservation (as distinct from conservatism), guardianship
One’s place in history, shoulders of giants, ancestry & posterity, making destiny
26G, From the Glossary
da4 (to be) accomplished, best, better, big, complete, critical, crucial, developed,
enormous, entire, extreme, far, full, fully grown, good, grand, great(er, est), hea-
vy, high, large(r), (very, greatly) important, long, loud, major, mature, mighty,
more, most, noble, noteworthy, old, overall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized,
ripe, seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome,
vital; a lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full