asonably warm here, the ideal and model climate inside
with radiant heat for a sun. The well-tended fire at home has its effects on the world.
Illumination and warmth mature, and then enter our larger families, from the nuclear
to the extended, carrying the influence outward and welcoming new lessons home.
Our words and deeds will not end here, so we’ll speak from the heart to the point,
to this smallest and safest circle of friends, in this scale model society and the first
of our social experiments. By conveyance and convection, the society starts here.
37.0, Family Members
Rewarding the woman’s persistence
Reward the woman’s commitment in order to merit her loyalty. First agreements,
divisions of labor and turf, personal boundaries and goals and avowals of warmth  
and intimacy, will face their first tests here at home. Failing here, they will not likely
work anywhere else. Each member first needs a place to begin. The various roles
are each great domains, unless they become the cause in small battles. Until these
commitments are equalled and risen upon, the home is a limit, not a base for one’s
operations. But the point of these points of beginning lies in their being outgrown.
Thus their first function puts aside fear and replaces it with security. Security then
becomes courage and courage turns into ability. This is the way that we know if a
family works: it has functional members of varying sizes. At least more often than
not: why some members cannot be redeemed has never been explained. Home is the
place where we first expect fairness and where we will first learn to trust. This can
be a poor preparation for life in the world outside, but at least we might have a few
years to pre-cover, in advance of those beatings that life in this world has to offer.
275

37.M, Key Words
Home, household, clan, familiar, kindred + people, others, individuals, humanity
A microclimate, hearth, warmth, security, intimacy; roles in working relationships
Microcosm, moral boundaries and practice, division of labor, social organization
Relations, convection, influences on the larger world; contributions, propagation
Commitments, ties, partnerships and contracts; meeting basic social requirements
Domestic, dominion, domain, domine; householder in Hindu & Buddhist doctrine
37.G, From the Glossary
jia1 (a, the) family, house, household, home, dwelling, domestic affair, relative,
clan, class, profession (s); (ruling) families; familiar, kindred; school of thought,
specialist; (to be) fa milial, familiar, at home, domestic, indoors; (to ) live with,
together; keep a household; (s, ed, ing); (a, the) family’s, household’s
ren2 (a, the) person, people, man, woman, one(s), other(s), another, human being,
individual (s); each (one), other persons/people; anybody, anyone, everybody,
everyone, somebody, someone (else)(’s); some, th ose; humanity, humankind,
mankind, society; character, citizen, fellow, folk; inhabitant, member, occupant,
participant, persona, personality, population, personnel, staff, role; (in) adulthood;
(of) maturity; (to be) human, adult, grown, mature; humanity’s; (a, the) person’s,
people’s, occupant’s; fellow-; -body, -man, -person, -ist
37.T, Tuan Zhuan
Family members
The woman’s true dignity lies within
The man’s true dignity lies without
The masculine (and) feminine principles
(Are) heaven’s (and) earth’s greater meanings
Family members have dignities (and) nobilities herein
Father (and) mother have their titles
(When) father (is) father (and) child (is) child
(When) elder brother (is) elder (and) younger (is) younger
(When) husband (is) husband (and) wife (is) wife
Then the family’s course (is) upheld
Uphold the family and all under heaven arranges itself
276

37.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.1: geese to shore, fledgling struggling, criticized)
Boundaries maintain the family*
Regrets pass
37.1x Boundaries maintain the family:
The purposes have yet to evolve
At the beginning the home is in order, as