sincere, credible, confident,
honest, trustworthy, truthful, assured, reliable, sure (to); (to) rely on, believe in,
be sure (of), verify, ascertain, validate, believe, have faith, trust, hold (that) (s, ed,
ing); will surely, certainly, truly (be); can be trusted to, is certain to, is sure to
61.T, Tuan Zhuan
The truth within
Flexibility dwells within while firmness secures the center
Satisfaction with adaptation
The true will then transform the realm
Piglets (and) fishes - promising:
Trust (is) extended to piglets (and) fishes
Worthwhile to cross the great stream:
Relying on a wooden boat’s hollowness
The truth within (is) accordingly worth (the) persistence:
Then (one) resonates with heaven
420

61.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.1: rely on assistance, the horse is powerful)
Readiness is promising
Presuming more is no comfort
61.1x First nine’s readiness (is) promising:
The direction has yet to evolve
When the truth which lies within is working as it should, it might do more learning
than teaching and have more questions than answers. That a thing can hold our faith,
or be believed or convincing, will say more about the one who wants or needs to be
certain than it does about the truth of that thing. Certain core levels of knowledge are
indispensably useful, and one mind, with a couple of cultures around it, will have all
of this most of us need. Sometimes it is good to go off on our own, to learn to hunt
pigs by watching the pigs, learn to fish by studying fish. The wheel and fire are well
enough known. There are down sides to too much knowledge and truth, or too much
of presumption and prejudice, or too much of smugness and arrogance. Believing as
little as necessary, unlearning when called for, will leave room to breathe in the mind.
61.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.2: granted ten pair shells, sovereign offers to Di)
The call of a crane in the shadows
Her young ones respond to her
I have a fine beaker of wine
And I, with your help, will drain it
61.2x Her young ones respond to her:
(From) within the heart’s hope
From his hiding place deep in the rushes, the young crane will reply to his mother’s
soft call with clear and precise harmonics. The simplest gesture will carry a complex
meaning across a crowded tavern. When like relates to like there is seldom a need to
shout. A gain in the power to hear might be accomplished two ways: by elevating the
volume and making more noise, or by better attending the ears, with their need for
occasional quiet. The first will be too intrusive to learn something new. Where two  
or more are gathered, a resonance will make up a truth of its own. We communicate
more than we know. Resonance crosses great gulfs, even where our words can’t go,
so there is a truth beyond words, connecting things with harmonics. But the fact that
one thing seems to ring true does not make it a truth. This is much bigger than that.
421

61.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.3: wheel throws spokes, man & wife wild-eyed)
Finding one’s counterpart
Perhaps to beat the drum, or maybe to quit
Perhaps to weep, or maybe to sing
61.3x Perhaps to beat the drum, (or) maybe to quit:
The position is not appropriate
At last he meets his comrade. Or maybe not. Maybe this is a spy for the forces of
evil, just waiting for a weakness to show. At the dizzying heights of his joy, he has
nothing to grasp or cling to. Laughing and singing, or sobbing and sighing, a great
truth can take both sides. But someone lacking a core or a central identity, someone
who still needs to learn who he is, might lack the right tools to recognize the other.
We all take in unique views of a scene: two eyes set apart already means two points
of view. And all pools will bend and diffract the light a little. But purely relative truth
will not work. It ends in codependence. Then one can be neither enemy nor a friend
and nobody’s message makes any pure sense. We’ll end in a hall of mirrors,