tral as the source of refreshment is dying of pure neglect. This is not a fault of
the time, although time bore helpless witness as apathy grew and distractions up on
the surface of things took over with their own importance. As a resource, he has let
himself go, and friends don’t enjoy coming around: he just isn’t refreshing enough.
And these same friends could help rebuild his well. The good life has infrastructure:
it wants a longer vision, beyond the shortsighted concerns, or beyond just one stage
of life. At least the fish here indicate adequate water: the potential seems to be there.
But this impasse will only be broken one way: a new beginning will need to be made
alone. He must first become a little more worthy. Someone will need to take charge.
343

48.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.3: coming, going, canyons, ledge is also headrest)
The well has been cleaned, but nothing is consumed
Causing our hearts’ sorrow
It is suitable and available to draw from
Were the sovereign made aware,
all might receive of this abundance
48.3x The well (is merely) turbid, (but) nothing (is) consumed:
Passing in sorrow
* Seek the sovereign’s enlightenment:
To receive the abundance
Here is a clean, deep well, full of clear, cold water, but nobody’s stopping to drink.
Maybe the newly-cleaned well looks like it hasn’t been tested and proven by time.
Maybe it just has no reputation to go on ahead of it yet. Maybe the people are kept
unaware by rumors and superstitions - about toads and the other slippery things that
dwell in darker depths. Maybe it’s still a little unsettled, more turbid than toxic, and
just needs someone to get some flow going. At least the flow of information could
use a little assist. Unappreciated value is not really value yet: the diamonds hiding
deep in the dirt are just rocks. We cannot rely on the well to proselytize for itself.
Something is offered but not being taken, an able person is not yet acknowledged.
Is this water  not expensive enough? They’ll drink better water who treasure it more.
48.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.4: ridgepole holds up, to take more, deficiency)
The well is being relined
Nothing is wrong
48.4x The well’s relining is not a mistake:
Renovating the well
Good stewards set aside a time for posterity, to be worthier founders and ancestors.
The well is now closed for repairs, shut down and torn apart, being newly relined in
stone and tile. Today it is just a wound, just a crude hole in the ground, useless and
muddy and ugly. Old forms and structures lie scattered around. But this is one full
step beyond its decay, and many beyond the first digging. If these workers can be
steady and careful they’ll merit as much respect as they give. If they can take even
longer, to do it better than right, the well will become an ancestral shrine. But if they
weary of the work, they’ll leave an inferior legacy. The heirs will have to start over,
muttering, thinking less of the ancestors, remembering them as shortsighted slobs.
The well-built character serves future generations. This is a way of paying our rent.
344

48.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.5: persistence is promising, advance is by steps)
The well has a clear, cold spring to drink from
48.5x The cold spring holds refreshment:
In the center (and) correct
This well-made well springs a big leak in the bottom. It’s about as good as it gets.
This certainly was a hole worth throwing some riches down into. Time was taken
to do it correctly, care was found to find the right place and patience was there to dig
the extra depth, with every tedious hodful of earth and every stone carefully placed.
Now they’ll have this cold, clear water to drink for the rest of their stay on the land.
Even the old timers and the locals are stunned. The water is so clear and clean that
the frogs get edgy and leave. It also explains all those old prayer beads they found,
with glyphs of the dead being brought back t