e myriad beings diverge, but their affairs (are) interrelated
Estrangement’s timely application (is) very important here!
282

38.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.1: soaking one’s tail, embarrassing)
Regrets pass
The missing horse
Should not be pursued: it returns on its own
Upon seeing the worst in others
Simply avoid mistakes
38.1x Seeing the worst (in) others:
In order to avoid mistakes
The horse gets edgy and bolts, but the farmer will keep to his task. When night falls
the horse returns on his own and gets fed. To feed the horse is to meet him halfway.
He can keep his unbroken spirit this way and gets to know the neighborhood better.
To best prepare to live your own life, first prepare to let the others live theirs. Beings,
given sufficient patience and time, will find an appropriate order, and still keep that
spark which makes each unique. Even the wrongness in beings will serve us when
this is allowed to stand out. Evil is a part of this world of men, just as a treacherous
footing is a part of the world of earth. One does not go far fearing this, nor does one
level the earth, though many may try. We may seek instead to know where we stand,
and if this is not any good then we move. Respect for what is might even save lives.
38.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.2: biting tender meat, burying nose, no harm done)
Meeting with the leader in the alley
Not wrong
38.2x Meeting with the leader in the alley:
Still not off the path
He meets with his leader in secret, to formulate plans for success in small matters.
The permit was too hard to get. In times of strife and estrangement, trust is renamed
conspiracy. When the law says that three make a riot, then two make an excellent
quorum. If the people could vote on this plan, the critics would tear it apart. They
hear as they will, each to his delusion, so a court is convened with all critics absent,
in the shadows of this quiet alley. They cut across the protocols; they cut through
all of the crap. No, these two are not following rules. If they did they would add to
the pressures to make things the same and unchanging, which is nothing less than
the cause behind all of this tension. Breaking free to be just yourself is the way past
this problem. Minds will find ways to meet, and these smaller movements add up.
283

38.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.3: prince offers to son of heaven, commoner cannot)
Seeing a wagon held up
Its oxen restrained
Its occupant’s head shaved and nose cut off
Regardless of beginning, there will be an end
38.3x Seeing the wagon held up:
The place (was) not appropriate
* Regardless of beginning, there will be an end:
Finding firmness
He loads his fancy wagon with goods and takes the scenic back roads. But a gang
from some sub-species of man descends on him from above. The bandits’ dreams
come true. They drag his wagon into the bushes and do unspeakable things to his
oxen. Sated with this they spoil his clothes, shave his head and then cut off his nose.
And vanish with the plunder and spoils. In return for the chance to have all this fun,
for cheering them up and making their day, they let him escape with his life. Such a
low beginning to have such a half-decent end! It almost seems like charity now. Life
must be all that he needed. Of course this act is of evil, even if these bandits did have
issues with mothers and fathers. No relative ethic will make it make sense. This is a
study in contrast and irreconcilable difference. When intolerable it will be changed.
38.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.4: decreasing sufferings, take charge, expedite)
Estranged and alone
Meeting someone unique
Exchanging confidences
The distress
Is no longer wrong
38.4x Exchanging confidences, nothing (is) wrong:
The aims (are) carried out
He belongs to the smallest group possible, as alone as he might ever be. Repelled to
the edge of this strange situation, he works his way further outward. As