ty left, he may give a few final commands and open the doors
to the granaries, and maybe the door to the vault. If ever he envied that fellow who
lives in the forest, aimlessly tracking up virgin terrain, now is the best time to go.
Disaster, or childhood’s end? Mulch and some seeds still remain. Give it to time.
59.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure
(Fan Yao 29.6: bound, and imprisoned, three years without gains)
Dispersing one’s hot-bloodedness
Getting distance
Far away to reappear
No blame
59.6x Dispersing one’s (hot-)blood(edness):
Removed from suffering
Some say it is living to steam up with passion, to burn oneself up with high heat,
to bleed much and often, for this means that they have made contact. And yet it is
this, not staying away from trouble, which will leave them numb and thick-skinned.
Passion is much more fun when it gets to choose where and how it plays, but this
might mean cooler hearts and minds, with plenty of air, wind and distance to take
away some of the heat of hot blood. Those emotions wrongly called strong become
vapor and steam: this is the best way for them to get carried away. Resentment and
jealousy, anger and fear: detachment from these is not anesthesia, it is staying away
from entanglements and unenlightened activity. The climate is rich with alternative
states to explore. In some of these, angst and suffering are but voluntary endeavors.
411

59, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 55, Feng, Abundance
qian gua (inverse): 60, Jie, Boundaries
jiao gua (reverse): 48, Jing, The Well
hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
59, Notes
* 59.4 Perhaps the first formulation of eclecticism (Za J ia or The Miscellaneous
School): to select only the best from a number of sources and not to be bound to
or within any one creed or group. This is a much higher position, still but poorly
understood by the majority, who prefer the contrivances or the trappings in 59.2.
This higher order is again referred to in the Fan Yao 06.4 as the way beyond con-
flict.
59, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Zain; Path between Hod and Tipareth (Trad: Tp-Bn)
* Tarot: The Lovers (The greater embrace)
* Astrology: Third House, Mutable Air, Gemini
59, Quotations
* I came like water, and like wind I go. —Omar Khayyam
* ... The mind  /  passes, the eye closes, the spirit is a passage;
The beauty of things was born before eyes and
sufficient to itself; the heart-breaking beauty
Will remain when there is no heart to break for it. —Robinson Jeffers
* For I have never seen, and never shall see, that the cessation of the evidence
of existence is necessarily evidence of the cessation of existence.
—William De Morgan
* ... the ultimate wisdom, which deals with beginnings, remains locked in a seed.
 —Hal Borland
* ... many people who imagine that they can talk and think about metaphysics
wouldn’t know it if they found it in their soup. —Idries Shah
* There is a difference between spirit things and bodily things. Nothing bodily
dwells in another. But spiritual things dwell in each other. —Meister Eckhart
* To the question “Where does the soul go when the body dies?” Jacob Boehme
answered, “There is no necessity for it to go anywhere.” —Aldous Huxley
412

GUA 60, JIE2, BOUNDARIES
 
  Binary 110 010 = 50; Dui below, Kan above
60.X, Overall Image
Over the pond there is water
Boundaries
The noble young one, accordingly,
regulates numbers and measures
and weighs the merits of action
Water spills over the dam and the bridge, too much to contain or control. Without
a way to pass what we can’t use along, or to store more than a little bit extra, a flood
like this could wash us away. So too with the things we desire, or our abundance of
options to choose from, the feelings available to us: this could use a good channel,
or places to go chosen wisely. This means measure and budget, proper restraint and
proportion, ratios and rationality. But the artificial constraint which does no honor
to natural law will not work: the