ends of which
were secretly twisted round and folded up within it, cut it asunder with his sword.
 —Plutarch, Alexander
* Arrakis teaches the attitude of the knife - chopping off what’s incomplete and
saying “Now it’s complete because it’s ended here.” —Frank Herbert, Dune
* Let the sword decide after the stratagem has failed. —Arabic proverb
* My deeds upon my head!  I crave the law.
—Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice
* Truth has rough flavors if we bite it through. —George Eliot
* There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one who is striking at
the root. —Thoreau
* The more corrupt the state the more numerous the laws. —Tacitus
* I know no method to secure the repeal of bad, obnoxious, or unjust laws so
effective as their strict execution. —Ulysses S. Grant
* What you cannot enforce, do not command. —Sophocles
184

GUA 22, BI4, ADORNMENT
 
  Binary 101 001 = 41; Li below, Gen above
22.X, Overall Image
At the foot of the mountain is flame
Adornment
The noble young one, accordingly, clarifies numerous policies*
But does not presume to execute justice
A glorious sight to the folks in the valley, but this glamorous light on the surface
of things preempts and precludes the long vision. Only one side of this issue is lit,
one only sees part of the surface. You see it with your own eyes; what pleases the
eye is apparently true; how could appearances be deceiving? From this point of view,
folks can be told nearly anything about the world beyond. Even the near is subject
to tricks and plays of the light, the magician’s stock in trade. This is not to negate
the beautiful, or local information: most of cultural thought is raised in small spaces.
But deeper issues and critical precedents want the broader and longer perspectives.
22.0, Adornment
Satisfaction
A little worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Beauty and grace for most are glamour and cultural finery: folks pause when their
eyes are caught by the evident, or according to local custom, be this a grand illusion
or a small illumination. Adornment will play with the forms of g lamour and sham.
It can also have some quantum of substance, as with the arts of a culture. To know
the small and nearby is a great thing: nearsight is a big part of vision. Perhaps the
best example is a goat on the side of a mountain, stepping with consummate style,
advancing one well-reckoned step at a time, adding up small successes and taking
great care in distinguishing this crag from that. This gets him slowly up to the top
where the truly grand vistas await. It is his nearsight that allows him to do this. If he
knows where he stands the whole world is at his feet. But humanity seems to want
to light up a little and stop there, taking comfort in what it thinks is the known, lying
in comforting ways. When ethnics transcend ethnocentrics, they still can’t get past
the anthropocentric. This may be a way of controlling the known, much like locking
oneself in a box. Still, there is enough detail here to fill up the whole of a lifetime.
185

22.M, Key Words
Dressing up, beautifying, decorating, embellishing; relation of form to content
Elaboration, costumery, vanity, cosmetics, fashion, facade, veneer, posturing
Refinement, style, grace, elegance, charm, class, etiquette, protocol, formality
Nearsight, limited vision, myopia, glamour, fascination, sham, illusion, pomp
Superficiality, public image, fancy surfaces; proximity’s effect on apparent size
Aesthetics, beauty way, highlighted substance; the cultural artifact as substance
22.G, From the Glossary
bi4 (to) adorn, dress (up), beautify, embellish, decorate, make graceful (s, ed, ing)
(to be) elegant, brilliant, ornate, fancy, dressed up, sumptuous; superficial, near-
sighted; (a, the) adornment, ornamentation; shell, treasure; model (s)
22.T, Tuan Zhuan
Adornment satisfies
The flexible comes forward and refines the firm
Consequently, satisfaction
Alternately, the firm rises upwards and refines the flexible
Consequently, a little worthwhile to