h oc,
near to, about to, on the brink of, imminent, at hand; [rolling up sleeves, getting
down and dirty]
19.T, Tuan Zhuan
Taking charge
Firmness penetrates and so prevails
Satisfaction along with acceptance
The firm (is) central (and) resonant
Great fulfillment (is) due to correctness
(As is) heaven’s course
To arrive in the eighth month would be unfortunate:
Waning does not take long
168

19.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
 (Fan Yao 07.1: setting out to codes, to deny order unfortunate)
United in commitment
Persistence is promising
19.1x United commitment’s persistence (is) promising:
Intending to advance correctly
The task ahead is enormous, but so are resources at hand. The scope is sufficient
to make sense to gang up, organize forces and delegate tasks. This means making
some new social group, an entity of sorts, but without any brains or a conscience.
Responding to simple agreements to adapt their behavior and notions of good and
right, members receive equipment and rations and booklets with rules and codes.
The common resource and effort is pooled toward ends productive and righteous.
The group has will and a purpose, notions useful as constructs, but these will have
no living sentience, no sense, no self or mind of their own. Do not expect a smart
group mind to coordinate the effort: this is only language. The one with the shovel
is the real being here. When work is done, the group should disband for his sake.
19.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.2: content to return, promising)
United in commitment
Promising
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
19.2x United commitment (is) promising (and) without doubt
worthwhile:
Not yet accepting destiny
Many hands make the work easy. Many minds give it some depth. Sometimes the
groups will not want this, as many want all of their members to serve the collective
endeavor and to have no thoughts of their own. But today’s little gang knows better.
This is not an alliance of cattle, nor a government from a great center, nor the hive
with the huge, pregnant queen. They go side by side, with separate aims and choices,
each with a vision of what lies ahead, unobstructed by leaders and plans. If they each
have many options, than the many should have many more. Our causes make use of
myths and ideas, but these tend to make foolish leaders. Groups should not try to
be towers. They ought to be bushes, each branch with its seed. One doesn’t sow a
field of grain by planting the seeds in one hole. Diversity means strong and stable.
169

19.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.3: do not worry the certainties, sustain happiness)
Sweet commitment
Not an orientation with merit
Following concern about this
Avoid errors
19.3x Sweet commitment:
The position is not appropriate
* Following concern about this:
The errors will not be lasting
While those around him get up and go, he squats on his thoughts of next season,
already tasting the fruits of the labor he now postpones. To let ourselves be driven
a little by thought of rewards at the end is not a bad or unusual thing. But if these
provide all the force for the movement, then any disincentive will come at the worst
of all possible times. Spring should be moving enough. But wanting only the good
stuff for free, or wanting to be rewarded just for being you, is getting a little ahead
of and full of ourselves. There are bitter and bittersweet lessons ahead - sour, salty
and savory too. Why want to start with dessert? Life needs exuberant movement,
or it will not even feed dreams. Some people pay to get exercised. You cannot just
plod along, using up last year’s health. Why not harvest some of this feeling now?
19.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.4: marriage delayed beyond term, late is timely)
Complete commitment
Without mistakes
19.4x Complete commitment, without mistakes:
The position (is) appropriate
He is late in getting started, but this time was spent in good planning. Those who
w