fore they are obvious. Heralds and portents, traces and signs may be subtle,
but unlike expectations, they are legible here in this moment. Winter solstice marks
the end of Sol’s decline, but a lagging cold has only begun. A shadow’s beginning
to form is not bad, unless you do not see it coming - for then all progress just goes
the wrong way. Without a thought about seasons, the mare gets a new winter coat.
The green beings take their first hints and so withdraw to their roots for the winter.
The creatures all know what they need to know, without any big brains or science,
they follow the order of things, and dress for the occasion. The eggs and the seeds
are as smart as they need to be with their own basic grasp of the nature of things.
02.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.2: at the heart of the militia, thrice commissioned)
Straight, square and complete
Without repetition, nothing cannot be turned to advantage
02.2x Six second’s movement:
Straight (is) the way to square
* Without repetition, nothing cannot be turned to advantage:
The earthly principle (is) illustrated
The dimensions of capacity unfold in a natural order. Count the points that fit onto
a line, the lines that fit into a square, the planes that fit into a solid, the solids that fit
into one span of time. Open the next dimension and options grow instantly endless.
Unfold four or more and there is the way. You can take an entire life and still fail
to cross one small field in all possible ways. And the ingrates complain about having
so little. If life is too short, make it wider, if too thin, go deeper, if amazed, rise up,
If this is not enough, live again, or be someone else. The being goes where it goes,
conditioned from behind, not by what is ahead, reaching, broadening, deepening
and enduring. A beginner’s mind keeps all of its options,* free from Been There
and free from Done That, the two human thoughts that suck the life from the world.
66

02.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.3: diligent modesty, will have closure, promising)
Restraint in display is suited to persistence
But for someone engaged in the royal service
No achievement brings closure
02.3x Restraining display (is) suited to persistence:
For the sake of timely development
* Someone engaged in the royal service
Knows (and) honors the whole
A work will not be a great work if the whole of its point is its author’s biography.
Higher purpose will serve a cause before self, and the great work of transformation
is higher purpose made real. This is not to denigrate self, or to say that great causes
are more important or sovereign than beings: it is beings who think and feel, beings
who bleed for their causes. No practical fiction like nation or group mind does this.
Why does the master work for the work’s success, and spread the credit around?
Why does the royal servant serve the cause and not the effect? It is not that the work
is its own reward, or that some greater good may be served here: the result is simply
life’s journey through life and by success is the way life advances. This effort needs
no distractions. It is better corrected than praised, and praised to better the work.
02.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
Fan Yao 16.4: at springs of readiness, gather companions in
Tied up in a bag
No blame, no praise
02.4x Tied up in a bag, no blame:
Discretion avoids trouble
Drawing the string, not attention, the result for now is in and secured, with no label.
Only oneself is a hard thing to be. To be either fetus or pregnant with the possible
are not the sustainable states: one wants to burst out and be more than potential,
one wants to be kinetic. Even a lifeless earth would want its stones to roll down hills,
would want its waters to rush down to the sea. So how much more for a living earth!
Yet there are times to be only potential, to learn the things that you have in the bag,
to learn and not push the envelope’s limits, to just be no big thing, to be set aside,