is in the center
Truly nothing of one’s own (is) given up
A young man returns to his humble home and greets the little woman. He kindles
a modest fire and enjoys a bite of dinner. And after they’ve put the wee ones to bed,
they have a bit of time left for small talk. They are partners in a short, little story,
about nearness and relevance. Is this a great life or what? No great meaning here,
no lofty ideals, nothing to shatter the earth, no mighty strides towards some great
and distant purpose. Nothing to get engraved upon tablets. Just feeling one’s way,
to take the place of high purpose, following subtle longings, getting tugged home,
not off to greatness. It is too small an ambit to call it ambition. But small is one of
the world’s great dimensions. All of life begins and goes forward through time by
seed and other small signals. These lucky folks live where the good things begin.
109

09.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
Fan Yao 61.3: finding counterpart, beat drum, quit, weep, sing
The carriage throws off its wheel spokes
Husband and wife are wild-eyed
09.3x Husband (and) wife (are) wild-eyed:
Unable to rectify domestic affairs
The journey across time begins, with big plans to travel great distances. But only a
short way from home the small bumps and curves take their toll. Husband and wife
set to, attempting to fix each other’s perspectives when they both should be fixing
the wheel. They are carried away by a miscarriage, of what ought to be important.
The grand scheme is lost to short sight, if rolling one’s eyeballs can be thought of
as sight. The squabble is petty, the problem small, but the power these have to ruin
the journey is great. There is surely some extra baggage here, weighty little things
maybe not worth the effort, and small stuff not worth the sweat. Especially given
that just up ahead are many tall molehills to climb. But small, useful things add up
as well: returned to the wheel and hub, those scattered sticks can be spokes again.
09.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.4: somehow to dance across the deep, no mistakes)
Be true
The bleeding stops, anxiety leaves
No harm is done
09.4x Be true, anxieties leave:
A higher (and) unifying purpose
Small, insignificant things like to blow themselves out of proportion, never more so
than when they play on fear and insecurity, on anxiety and doubt. Then whole new
perspectives are needed, larger frames of time or space, different light on the context.
Watch the little court fool as he flatters the king, beating himself with a bladder, only
a light and shallow amusement, a distraction from serious things. He speaks a truth
all twisted safely around. A little well-timed diversion turns the events at the choicest
of points. The king can no longer locate his aggression, his worries now feel silly,
and all sublimated away. A little finesse stays the heavy hand, a magic idea with an
army behind it is halted or set into motion. A mind is no big thing to change, with a
twinkle here or a discharge there, a wider horizon perceived or a little time to heal.
110

09.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.5: a gelded boar’s tusks, promising)
Being true is as good as a bond
Enrichment is by way of one’s neighbors
09.5x Being true (is) as good as a bond:
There is no enrichment alone
Life fights its war with attrition by being the sum of its selves and then more. And
thus we learn to grow collectives, we little ones pulling together to tame the greater
beast, stronger, more durable in our numbers, a network of allies, with a greater  pool
of resource and skills. It all begins on a small enough scale, sharing the garden tools
and stockpiles for the winter. Now fire and the wheel, or agriculture and husbandry
need only be invented one time. We think we wax mighty. Legacies will outlive their
heirs, empires their founders, cultures their sages, oracles their humble scribes, just
as our pools of genes outlive their living forms. And