ore making his changes, he watches the nexus
of forces gather. For three days after, he watches how things are unfolding. At any
point here he is ready to shift his direction as needed. A process is not the same as a
thing. To mistake reforming and learning for things will take them out of context.
57.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.6: well comes in, do not cover, be true)
Subtleties happening under the bed
Losing some valuables and an axe
Constancy has its pitfalls
57.6x Subtle (things) happening under the bed:
The top (is) exhausted
* Losing some valuables (and) an axe:
“Correct” along with unfortunate
Something is crouching beneath the bed, like wind stirs behind the curtains at night.
Oh, is that so? He decides that he will not be fooled twice. The last time this thing
happened, it was only a couple of spooks, and it cost him a bundle for all of those
wizards and priests and scribes and diviners, just to settle his nerves. He decides that
he has been there and done that now and needs not go there again. Content with his
better sense, and certain of his maturity, he assembles his fine explanation, solidly
based upon one single case, and goes right back to sleep. But sometime between this
dream and the dawn, these spooks run away with his treasures, they spirit away his
belongings. Of course the mind needs to generalize. It needs to oversimplify things.
Sometimes it thinks belief can stand in for learning. But then it gets mysteries back.
399

57, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 51, Zhen, Arousal
qian gua (inverse): 58, Dui, Satisfaction
jiao gua (reverse): 57, Xun, Adaptation (chong gua 3)
hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
57, Notes
* 57.3 Insanity: doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different
results. —Albert Einstein (attributed)
57, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yetzirah of Yetzirah
* Tarot: Prince of Swords
* Astrology: Aquarius Ascending, Fixed Air
57, Quotations
* At least I knew who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I must have
changed several times since then. —Lewis Carroll
* And the wind - the wind  / the wind hides in a hollow tree
and whistles out at me. —Lawrence Ferlinghetti
* We think in generalities, but we live in detail. —A. N. Whitehead
* ... the magic of necessary words ... . Words that may become alive and walk up
and down in the hearts of the hearers. —Kipling
* Speak to each one in accordance with his degree of understanding.
—Mohammed
* No problem is too difficult to be solved by a theoretician. —Arabic proverb
* I can’t give you brains, but I can give you a diploma.
—The Wizard of Oz (paraphrase)
* Sell your cleverness and buy bewilderment. —Rumi
* Adaptability is not imitation. It means power of resistance and assimilation.
—Gandhi
* In the struggle for survival, the fittest win out at the expense of their rivals because
they succeed in adapting themselves best to their environment.
—Charles Darwin
400

GUA 58, DUI4, SATISFACTION
 
  Binary 110 110 = 54; Dui below, Dui above; Chong Gua
58.X, Overall Image
Interconnecting pools
Satisfaction
The noble young one, accordingly,
joins with friends for discussion and practice
Pleasure on the surface and pleasure in the depths. Like we were taught as children,
the magic word is still please. There are multiple pools involved here, many wetlands
and lochs. The water in time will be one, inseparable, seeking its one level, borrowed
back and forth, circulated between selves, and only stagnant if pooled in one body.
And thus there is giving and taking, as one reflects another, and the one who gives
is enriched, and the one who takes enriches the giver. Encouraging each other is a
highly contagious cure for disease. The world improves in resonant ways when a
few improve their moods, awash in their feelings, clean, refreshed and replenished.
58.0, Satisfaction
Fulfillment
Rewarding to persist
There is a lot of proper time to savor enlightened self-interest. Life’s ser