Yao 19.5: informed commitment, a great noble’s necessity)
Sweet limitations
Promising
To continue has merit
60.5x Sweet limitation holds promise:
Occupying a place in the center
The master’s rules are good natured and easy to live with. He applies them just to
himself, then lets successes command and compel. The discouraging thoughts and
prohibitive rules play no great part in his law. Encouragement and challenge will do
the work instead. An excellent taste for the good life has him tasting the good things
that life has to offer. Numberless ages of struggling life whisper their secrets to him.
The organs of sense, including the mind, already come well equipped to learn how to
make more optimum choices, and satisfaction says when to stop. The proselytizing
and promoting we do only adds to confusion. The distasteful things are often most
thoroughly learned just by tasting. We’ll also learn to sample things in small bites.
Forbidden fruit is not really. When given free rein, life knows how to learn its limits.
60.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.6: rooster’s crowing rises, persistence has pitfalls)
Bitter limitations
Persistence is unfortunate
Regrets pass
60.6x Bitter limitation (is) persistent misfortune:
This path dead ends
A broken quill and torn parchment. The moralist writes down some rules for others
to follow. But the force of his resentment ruins the work. The bitter taste of his envy
and fear is only a foretaste of life in his future, rotting remains of a life he will miss.
He might be correctly afraid of his personal lack of resolve, and of the temptations  
he is told he must resist, but to structure his life by indirect method does damage to
life and its spirit. It is better to let the child reach for the flame of the candle. Then he
will know what hot means. Don’t tell him a thing will kill him, but point it out when
somebody dies in this way. These are the ways we grow, and fewer will actually die.
We will not grow because we are told to. Prohibition does little more than organize
the crime. If we must draw battle lines, then why not do so twixt  stupid and smart?
417

60, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 56, Lu, The Wanderer
qian gua (inverse): 59, Huan, Scattering
jiao gua (reverse): 47, Kun, Exhaustion
hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
60, Notes
* 60.1, 2 There is a topology here which wants to be understood. There is a door
from the house into the courtyard and a gate from the courtyard into the world
beyond. In line one, the subject has not yet been drawn even part of the way out.
In line two, there is some restlessness or curiosity in evidence.
60, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Netzach in Briah
* Tarot: Seven of Cups
* Astrology: Venus in Water
60, Quotations
* I am not eternity, but a man; a part of the whole, as an hour is part of the day.
 —Epictetus
* Without a sense of proportion there can be neither good taste nor genuine
intelligence, nor perhaps, moral integrity. —Eric Hoffer
* Know your measure. —Arabic proverb
* To drown in treacle is just as unpleasant as drowning in mud. —Idries Shah
* Too unslept hath thy seeking made thee, and too wakeful ... Still thou art a
prisoner - it seemeth to me - who deviseth a liberty for himself: ah! sharp
becometh the soul of such prisoners, but also deceitful and vicious ...
Yea, I know thy danger. But by my love and my hope, I conjure thee: cast not thy
love and thy hope away! ...
“Spirit is also voluptuousness,” said they. Then broke they the wings of their
spirit; and now it creepeth about, and defileth where it gnaweth.”
—Nietzsche, TSZ #8
* We cannot seek or attain health, wealth, learning, justice or kindness in general.
Action is always specific, concrete, individualized, unique. —John Dewey
* Morality is moral only when it is voluntary. —Lincoln Steffens
418

GUA 61, ZHONG1 FU2, THE TRUTH WITHIN
 
  Binary 110 011 = 51; Dui below, Xun above
61.X, Overall Image
Over the pond there is wind