mental growth, maturation, development; a longer process, one day at a time
Accommodation, patience, meeting criteria of place, due process, rites, protocol
Wild goose as symbol for long-term fidelity and commitment; following the order
Practicality, day to day progress, slowly and surely, a progressive conservatism
53.G, From the Glossary
jian4 (to) advance gradually, increasingly, advance by degrees, go little by little,
go bit by bit, go steadily, make gradual progress, make steady progress, pace one-
self, progress gradually, develop into; seep into, soak, saturate (s, ed, ing); (a, the)
proceedings, formalities, details, protocol, patient progress, (gradual, steady) ad-
vance, progress; (to be) next, slight; gradually, increasingly
53.T, Tuan Zhuan
Gradual progress leads to advance
The young woman’s engagement (is) timely
Advancing secures a position
Making progress will be an accomplishment
Advancing according to principle
(Is) a fitting way to do right by the realm
In such a position
The firm secures the center
To be still and also adapt
 (Is) movement without exhaustion
372

53.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.1: boundaries maintain the family, regrets pass)
The wild geese advance by degrees to the shoreline
The little fledgling* is struggling
There will be criticism
But not blame
53.1x The little fledgling is having difficulties:
Deserving no blame
The wild geese cross the great water, returning from their migration, bringing their
latest fledgling. They approach with the same formation, the same steady bearing
and wingbeats they began their journey with. But now they need to rest their wings
in a place their youngster has not seen before. The young one is weak, and in an odd
place, and he’s struggling to stay in formation. Strange noises assail him, echoing in
the cliffs, the other birds, giving odd and discomforting glances, squawk doubtfully.
It is known that a predator waits, since not all of the fledglings survive, or can prove
their worth and grow old, but this youngster has never seen one. As small as he is,
he would make a pretty good meal. Education will be a long and serious business,
and it begins with the language and signals. Constructive critique might save his life.
53.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.2: subtleties under the bed, scribes and diviners)
The wild geese advance by degrees to the cliffs
Drinking and eating and honking and honking*
Auspicious
53.2x Drinking (and) eating (and) honking (and) honking:
Not merely filling up
After circling for half of the morning and getting the lay of this land, the wild geese
find a good place to rest. Even the old predator is full and enjoying a nap. Although
there is enough food to gorge themselves and be gone, proper geese won’t do this.
Flapping their wings and calling with great celebration, they’ll summon all of the
geese who inhabit this land to come as a flock to the feast. Now the whole gaggle’s
here for the day, dining and drinking in peace and good cheer. With a whole lot of
jovial honking, they make their arrival both known and welcome. Getting familiar
with the territory, and bonding with the neighbors, will serve them longer than their
much needed meals and rest. Had they entered this new land as sneaks, suspicions
would have haunted them all day and night. This way they will soon have fit in here.
373

53.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.3: observing our own lives in advances and retreats)
The wild goose advances by degrees across the highlands
The husband, on expedition, never returns
The wife conceives but cannot raise her young
Brutal
Worthwhile to guard against predators
53.3x The husband presses on instead of returning:
Abandoning flock (and) kindred
* The wife conceives but (can)not raise (her) young:
Losing her own way
* Worthwhile (and) productive to guard against predators:
Responding (by) protecting each other
He flies to the rugged plateau and beyond, seeking out greater purpo