harm)
Joining with them without leadership
Unfortunate
08.6x Joining with them with no priorities:
Without a purpose (or) outcome
What sort of odd contradiction is this? Belonging and union work best when they
follow like water, feeling their way with the currents, with no big expectation or plan,
only living and learning en route. And yet now it is said that belonging and union,
without head or leader, no priorities, nor mind up in front, nor purpose or outcome
in view, nor knowledge of north, up or east, is the way to misfortune and trouble?
It is known to be smart for the leader to follow, for the head to learn, for the mind
to track, for a plan to adapt and improvise, for priorities to agree with a natural law.
It is known that succeed means also to follow. Spontaneity is not like chaos. The
block of uncarved wood still has its natural grain to guide the woodcarver’s vision.
Anarchy follows the natural order and alphas emerge to lead. Unity has a dir ection.
105

08, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 14, Da You, Big Domain
qian gua (inverse): 07, Shi, The Militia
jiao gua (reverse): 07, Shi, The Militia
hu gua (nuclear): 23, Bo, Decomposing
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
08, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Binah in Briah
* Tarot: Three of Cups
* Astrology: Neptune in Water
08, Quotations
* But we, to little state and transient God
Gave all our souls and let our loved ones bleed ...
Again we come out of our lesser loyalties, in tears,
To build love’s well-earned city in the rich sod.
—Warren McCulloch. Embodiments of Mind
* But when the sagely man appeared, limping and wheeling about in the exercise
of benevolence, pressing along and standing on tiptoe in the doing of righteous-
ness, then men began to be universally perplexed .... Then men began to be
separated from one another. —Zhuangzi
* Neither the country nor the society we build out of it can be healthy until we
stop raiding and running, and learn to be quiet part of the time, and acquire the
sense not of ownership but of belonging. —Wallace Stegner
* Those whose vision encompasses what they are as well as who they are know
the true breadth of life, which is far more important than its length.
—Julie Fawley
106

GUA 09, XIAO3 CHU4, RAISING SMALL BEASTS
 
  Binary 111 011 = 59; Qian below, Xun above
09.X, Overall Image
The wind travels high in the sky
Raising small beasts
The noble young one, accordingly,
trains and refines the character
The west wind drives across the sky, invisibly and without effort, yet making vast
changes. The vultures climb high on the zephyr, barely seen, watching the land in
great detail, for signs of life to erase. The winds of time remove the rough edges,
unsharpen stones, twist the great trees, erase the intrusions of s elf-importance and
human significance, all monuments to the small. The gentle breeze has the whole of
earth’s climate behind it, and all of the time in this world. The sage makes his profile
small to the wind, refines his outward nature, attending minutia and detail, polishing
surfaces, becoming a part of the unseen forces and part of the friendly persuasion.
09.0, Raising small beasts
Fulfillment
Thick clouds but no rain
From our western horizon
The zephyr, for all of its subtlety, still has the strength to drive the dense clouds
from the region, to haul all that heavy water away. Living things too small to see
transform a planet from lifeless desert to garden. And the logic of ignorant fools
can transform it right back into desert. The power to tame possessed by the small
counts time by the eon, no hurry, no matter. What is this season or that to the wind?
Culture waits for the crops, crops wait for rain and the rain waits for just the right
whim. How much more can less do? On the other side of the world, the butterfly’s
wing whips up a furious storm. But which butterfly was it? The sage will take care
and attend to his smallness, give up self-importance to side with a vaster presence,
to side with what endures, and in thi