tarted a little earlier, writing
the Yi dongzi wen , and was the first to call Confucian authorship o
f the Wings
into question.
This new Yi Li trend was marked by its own eclectic blend of Confucianism,
philosophical Daoism, religious Daoism (as it was processed by Shao Yong and
Zhou Dunyi), the Yijing (Yixue) tradition, and Buddhism. Eclecticism (Za J ia)
had a long tradition of its own, a good example being Wang Chong (27-100 CE),
and another, much later, Wang Yangming (1472-1529). Yi Li was the most critical
of Buddhism, which, in its Chinese evolution into Mahayana, had come a long
way in flight from  the Buddha’s original teachings, the best example being the
Buddha’s explicit doctrine of Anatta, the non-existence of souls, being somehow
turned into the transmigration of the soul. This was, in a way, parallel to the
departure of Christianity from the teachings of Jesus under the neurotic guidance
of Paul, only in China hearts and m inds would r emain fairly open and religious
wars be unheard of. Chan Buddhism (a Chinese pronunciation of the Pali word
jhana or Sanskrit dhyana, meditative absorption, Zen in Japan) combined with
philosophical Daoism and was divested of much metaphysical nonsense in the
process. This was a little more palatable. The Yijing held an important place in the
Yi Li  repertoire, but not as the center of attention, and not as a self-contained
system. Further, the philosophy embedded in the Wings was placed at the same
level of importance as the text of the Zhouyi. The Yijing was used more as book
of illustrations of Life’s many principles, or as an aid to the explanation of ideas
from other sources.
525

The third trend was one of synthesis of the first two. This began with Zhang
Zai (1020-1077), who wrote the Zhengmeng and Yishou, but it became most
influential in the Southern Song with the work of Zhu Xi (1130-1200), the Great
Synthesizer, who wrote the Zhouyi benyi , the Yixue Qimeng, and preserved some
of Shao Yong’s work in his Song Yuan Xucan. Once again, the Yijing itself,
though it held a very important place in the repertoire, was merely one tool: it was
not fundamental to the overall structure of thought. This synthetic trend would
be dominant through most of the Southern Song and Ming dynasties. The Yixue
Qimeng may also have been the source of the method currently used to divine
using Yarrow stalks, the method which has "probability problems." (A translation
by Joseph Adler is available, see Bibliography). Although this method is not
inconsistent with descriptions given in Wing and Han texts, there is no way to be
certain that the older method of stalk divination is faithfully preserved here.
The 17th century, or the late Ming dynasty (1368-1643), marked yet another
reversal of emphasis, which would continue throughout the Qing (1644-1911).
This was a reaction to the homogenization of synthesis and to the threat of the
individual learnings and teachings being lost in a general soup. This was a period
of study of the individual classics, each according to its own merits. Because this
meant a return to the texts of the Han dynasty and earlier, wherever possible, this
trend was called the Hanxue, or the Han Learning. Even the works of Wang Bi
and the Xuanxue or proto-Yi L i scholars, were considered too modern for this
study. The Songxue, or the Song scholarship, was not of much help in this effort.
The Hanxue J ia tried to get as close as possible to the original masters, prior to
the influence of Buddhism and the Daoists who came after Laozi and Zhuangzi.
This effort was comparable to that of the Han Guwen Jia, or the 
Old Text School,
except that the convoluted writings of the Yiwei shu, or the Han’s Yi Apocrypha,
were resurrected in the process, much as Wang Bi had incorporated the Wings
without question into his study of the Yi. While the effort was made to organize
Yixue into its historical streams, and to separate the original from the commentary,
there was an enormously greater amou