ies and traditions, the father’s
fixations will follow the line. The young one enters the work as a son, questioning
what it means to inherit, and wondering just how far he might go saying no, thanks
to some of this treasure. Does he really need all the loose ends and misdeeds? What
should he do with those cognitive and behavioral problems? And what about those
horrid ideas regarding religion and politics? How much of his limited time is best
spent correcting his past? To stay stuck in this process rots a life too. What is tried
over time is not thereby proven true. It will be good for the young one to learn how
posterity feels: he can pass this new heirloom along to his own grandchildren. Three
generations before the change and three after, he makes a great stream of his lineage.
18.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.2: stilling those legs, not helpful in pursuits)
Correcting mother’s fixations
Ill-suited to firmness
18.2x Correcting mother’s fixations:
Find the middle path
Has his mother let him go too far already? Certainly not from his own point of view.  
If mother had her way he would find a nice wife, and never cross any great streams.
Neither will her love, so devoid of any conditions, allow her to see what her feelings
can do to this boy. With less of unconditional love he might know more of himself,
although accepting yourself as you are is not always the best thing to do. Whether
he fails to live out his own life, or forsakes the family life he was born to, blame and
guilt could plague him at either extreme. Even a path down the middle has problems
if calling for too much compromise. What is a good son to do? The warrior’s mom
packs his lunch; the young monster gets mother’s milk. You have to use your best
judgment with love. Show her that nature and nurture will both produce in excess.
163

18.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.3: useless to court woman losing self to wealth)
Correcting father’s fixations
There will be a little regret
But no great mistakes
18.3x Correcting father’s fixations:
Eventually not a mistake
Because I said so! just does not ring true for an answer. Father’s belief in the right
somehow seems wrong. Maybe not wrong enough to petition for be tter ancestors,
but enough for a young one to want to sound out the family idols. Not old enough
to be a good judge yet, not knowing the questions to ask, he still has an ear for the
hollower sounds. He could tap these idols ever so lightly and learn all he needs to
know, but when was a simple sufficiency ever the talent of youth? Thus he whacks
them with a large stick. The legacy which remains is smaller, but a lot more sturdy.
This is like sorting the inheritance early. Posterity has its duties and rights in both of
time’s major directions. Footsteps may track separate paths. One generation has
no right to bind the next.* Each generation has an instinct and right to assert this.
18.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.4: cauldron’s broken leg, spilling the duke’s meal)
Indulging father’s fixations
To continue meets with disgrace
18.4x Indulging father’s fixations:
Continuing (is) less than gainful
A lot of entrenched human error w ill get broad support from the culture around it.
Families and groups may tolerate error as though this went with belonging, while
the young get lots of advice to continue this trend and are pressed to accept these
pathologies as if they were part of the meals. Wait until you are older, you’ll see.
Don’t swim against the stream. You’re breaking our hearts. What can one person
accomplish? This is not how we raised you. Stay here where you belong and work
within the system for change. All of the lemmings are doing it. There will always
be places to place and hide blame, or to shelve your honor and hide from yourself.
Humankind will never grow up in this way. A bending received in one’s childhood
is not an excuse worth a lifetime. Victims form a much larger class than innocents.
164