ulation; continuum
30.G, From the Glossary
li2 (to) rise, arise, radiate, diverge, separate, contrast, depart, differ, digress, part,
get distance, distinguish (from, out of); articulate, leave, spread out, stand out,
move on, abandon, choose (one), decide, part, cut, divide, distribute, arrange, set
out, pass on, pass through, hang down, hang from (s, ed, ing); (to be) di stinct,
different, diverse, diversified, divided, separated, off, away (from), distant, apart
(from), without; pendant, dependent, dispersed, independent (of); (a, the) arising,
rearising, departure, removal, distinction, divergence, division, separation, dis-
tance, difference (from); radiance, display, fire, flame, firelight, highlight; net; vis
a vis each other; a bird, esp. an oriole (colorful contrast); figure ground relation-
ships; the root of the English word "existence" is to stand out or stand forth;
"When Li birds sing, silk worms grow" (Shuowen)
30.T, Tuan Zhuan
Arising
(Means) to be conditioned
The sun (and) moon (are) conditioned upon heaven
The hundreds of grasses, the plants
(and) the trees are conditioned upon the earth
Doubled clarity, accordingly, (is) conditioned upon the true
Then transformation completes (all things) under heaven
The flexible (is) conditioned upon the central (and) correct
Given this, fulfillment
And so it is that to care for the cow (is) promising
234

30.1, 1st 9, Z hi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.1: wanderer fussy, annoying, courting suffering)
Taking steps but seeming confused
Respect this
And avoid errors
30.1x Taking steps in confusion (but) respecting this:
Thereby to avoid errors
The past has brought us this far. Now the dawn lights up a new land, to which this
long, winding path has led. What a thing to wake up to: a tangled network of trails,
footsteps and tracks, cryptic glyphs of human direction, and few clues to which ones
brought us here. Must we know where we were to know where we are? Or where we
are going? Tracking yourself means going nowhere in circles: the outcome is right
where we stand. Can’t we simplify things if we limit the field of study? If we make
the past a summary, pause in our search to ask for directions, admit our ignorance,
ask someone who has been here and respect the place to which we have come as the
place to start out for the future? Another way to learn where we are is simply to go
someplace new, leaving some of ourselves behind for all the learning that lies ahead.
30.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.2: great wagon for loading, have somewhere to go)
Golden radiance
Most promising
30.2x Golden radiance (is) most promising:
Finding the middle path
The sunny disposition is not wrong about having it all, or about letting all of it go.
Sunshine is not just a way to talk about life: life is sunshine reborn. Life is a light
which has now found ways to light up even at night. The mind is a flame from the
sky. Awareness is light which once was locked deep in the sun. So what, then, of the
shadows and the darkness and doubt? Is there enough credibility here to scoff at the
sunny one’s optimism? Or to say that a golden radiance has less than a beaming
face value? Let us not talk about optimism: this wants to defend itself with denial.
But talk instead about optimizing, how to make and take the most value from life.
Light is what makes value: the sun’s gold is no different than light which bounces
off treasure. Give it away: you never see the light that something keeps for itself.
235

30.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.3: biting into preserved meat, encounter decay)
The sun declines with its radiance
Not drumming on clay pots and singing
Leads to much of old age’s lament
Unfortunate
30.3x The sun declines with its radiance:
Why should this be prolonged?
He sits on his porch, watching the sun set, dimming his mood with the darkening
light, sighing: Yea, the sun must go down, and so all that I am must also go down.
He’s going gently and fadi