f eternity lies in wait
to ruin this boat. Time will indeed do horrible things, both to new boats and to these
fine, silk garments. And when that time finally arrives, that lovely silk jacket of his
will make a fine rag to plug up a leak in the hull. Entropy is the law, plan for it, and
prepare to recycle. Knowing things change is more useful knowledge than hoping
they’ll stay the same. With our contingency plans, we progress in more dimensions.
434

63.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.5: Ji Zi’s brightness obscured, worth persisting)
The eastern neighbor sacrifices cattle
Yet this is not equal to the western neighbor’s
modest spring offering*
The genuine received their blessings
63.5x The eastern neighbor sacrifices cattle:
This is not equal to the western neighbor’s timing
* The genuine received their blessings:
The good fortune (has) completely arrived
The neighbor in the east sacrifices his best ox. The ceremony performed could not
have been any more perfect. But still he can find no peace. The neighbor in the west,
meanwhile, offers just two small baskets of grain, using the rite’s shorter form, and
he grins like a fool until fall. On the face of this, it doesn’t seem fair, but there is no
justice lost here. The eastern neighbor has shown the great spirits just how much he
can spare, and then how much more he is willing to take. These do not lead to great
satisfaction, even though he says please. The western neighbor sees things the other
way round. He is offering out of last year’s harvest and is saying thank you instead.
East is where the day begins and west is where it ends. The time already completed
is better suited to gratitude, for blessings already received. Sacrifice isn’t for taking.
63.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.6: being true is as good as impressive, promising)
Soaking one’s head
Serious
63.6x Soaking one’s head (is) serious:
(But) how could this continue?
If he’s already across, then what is he still immersed in? Is that farther shore just not
different enough? Does he now recount the steps of his crossing, rej oicing again in
his better maneuvers, trembling again at all his close calls? This is not re ally across,
but still in over his head, immersed in what was and what might have been, alive in a
past worth a memory, but unable to swim, row or dwell there forever. There’s much
more to do or have done here than simply to cross the great stream. The reasons for
crossing are still up ahead, and looking backwards like this keeps him but halfway
there, with no more objectives in sight. Living fills up a mind, reliving saturates one.
Yes, old man, sir, we have already heard this story, a hundred times told in the tavern.
But still more impressive is how you avoid our question: After that what did you do?
435

63, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
qian gua (inverse): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
jiao gua (reverse): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 40, 64, 54, 38
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
63, Notes
* 63.1, 6 As a clue to some of the line meanings: the authors had fun with wet tails
and heads and braking wheels. Most people who try to interpret these lines tend to
forget which shore they are supposed to be on, leading to wrong interpretations.
Reading these lines, relative to where you are in the process of crossing the great
water, it helps to imagine yourself there at the ford, or partway or nearly across.
* 63.3 Gao Zong, the Illustrious Ancestor, was a Shang emperor, aka Wu Ding
(r. 1229-1171 
BCE). His exploits are also mentioned at 64.4. Only the tested and
proven were employed after this was complete. And so, for the competent, this
was not the end. Fan Yao 03.3 also speaks to the subject of competence gained
from experience.
* 63.5 This line is inconsistent with a theory we sometimes hear professed that
private sacrifice was prohibi