w, Zhen above
34.X, Overall Image
Thunder in the sky above
Big and strong
The noble young one, accordingly, outside of respect,
will not take a step
Great vigor, on top of great strength. With the pure force of heaven behind it, what
voice is more mighty than thunder? And yet even when two parts in three are pure
strength, if there is no sense of where best to go and what best to do, then the force
will not do work and thus it cannot be power. Power will have a proper path, and it
is usually on it: it will go where the world opens up to it. It has the sound of doors
slamming open. Thunder may be efficient, but only in its aimlessness. Living things
want to be more specific, and displace things from place to place, and thus consider
efficiencies whenever a choice is involved. They need respect and regard for facts.
34.0, Big and Strong
Worthwhile to persist
To persist is not to try to persist. It’s to move and succeed in persisting. Success at
this will measure its worth. Self-destructive and self-defeating behavior cannot then
be power, no matter how much force is applied. Power will find the way to its end.
It is hard for a thing to be great if it is not also correct, or obeying the natural laws.
Power is not a quantity, or a quantum of force, or a strain in the muscles, a feeling of
having one’s purpose stressed and resisted: this is force, and no great force at that.
Power is the rate at which one slips past all of this, and then succeeds, as the dancer
moves with the music’s pulse and transforms one thing into another. The wise are
not entangled in an identity with force: they will master its clean release. Persistence
across and through time is different than pounding and blundering forward: it might
even pause to sense some new directions to go, new choices opening up, and so it’s
a form of intelligence. When force is too blind, or its purpose too narrow, to pause
and consider its options, the complicated results of its own simple-minded activity
will often be its biggest problems and obstacles. Survival of the fittest means fitting.
257

34.M, Key Words
Much, great, full, big, major, extensive + strength, vigor, energy, potency, force
Assertion, aggression, self-reliance, tenacity, forging a head; initiative, purpose
To be headstrong, demanding, pushy, obstinate, obsessed, driven; testing a limit
Robust, dominant; feedforward, the need for feedback & sense; might needs right
Power wanting governing; meta-solutions to problems; problems of tunnel vision,
Insight as reorganizing perceptual field; power is really measured by effectiveness
34.G, From the Glossary
da4 (to be) accomplished, best, better, big, complete, critical, crucial, developed,
enormous, entire, extreme, far, full, fully grown, good, grand, great(er, est), high,
heavy, large(r), (very, greatly) important, long, loud, major, mature, mighty, old,
more, most, noble, noteworthy, overall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized, ripe,
seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome, vital; a
lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full) development, entirety,
grand (-eur, -ness), greatness, growth, (great) importance, largesse, wholeness, vast-
ness, maturity, majority; a great deal, (very) much, very; already, completely, en-
tirely, fully, greatly, thoroughly, wholly, en masse , well-; of (great, crucial, vital)
importance
zhuang4 (to be) strong, vigorous, forceful, powerful, potent, fertile, big, mighty,
large, great, grand, magnificent, stout, able-bodied, healthy, hardy, hearty, virile,
full-blown, fully grown, dynamic, robust, fierce, dominant, animated, lively, in-
domitable in spirit, [alpha] ; (a, the) strength, vigor, energy, force, power, might,
potency, prime of life, dominance, fierceness; (to) strengthen, embolden, enliven,
encourage, enspirit, invigorate, animate, make better; (grow, wax) strong (s, ed, ing)
34.T, Tuan Zhuan
Big (and) strong
Greatness is that which is strong
The firm applies force
Hence