This) leads to the abyss
90

06.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.1: simply treading forward, nothing wrong)
Not prolonging certain endeavors
The small will talk
In the end, promising
06.1x Not prolonging certain endeavors:
Contention is not suited to being prolonged
* Even though the small will talk
One’s arguments are clear
He has only begun to enact his plan and already gossips are making their noises.
Having made a noisy beginning, he resolves to change his mind, plead no contest,
withdraw and start over. Now the gossips could get really excited, but half of the
conflict has just slipped away. The noise was good information, even if its content
was not. Friction and drag are kinds of intelligence. Note that the swiftest boat has
also the smallest wake, and the sharpest knife cuts without effort. So where is one
wrong in changing one’s mind? Trial balloons are meant to get popped; all great
artists have lots of erasers; if the water is really cold, it is best if only your big toe
tells you so. Sometimes being a quitter is wisdom. Anyone can begin in an error,
it requires more of a fool to complete o ne. What is there now to defend so soon?
06.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua: 12, Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.2: embracing servitude, only common one’s promise)
Not capable of contending
Capitulate and take refuge
One’s home town’s people, three hundred households,
Will escape suffering
06.2x Not capable of contending:
Capitulate, take refuge (or) sneak away
* From a lowly position to contend with superiors:
Suffering comes as a harvest
You travel to see the tyrant, bearing a list of your village’s grievances and seeking
redress and justice. But your audience goes poorly, your lucid explanations, your
logical arguments fall upon deaf ears. You are absolutely correct and the tyrant is
equally wrong. Inferior people have all of the power today and reason has no voice.
And yet you bow,  and submit to honorable father, to a spoiled and arrogant fool.
You bite your tongue and swallow your pride, you get small and invisible quickly
and don’t even think about justice today. The truth was only one of the options:
to find the others first means surviving. Picking one’s battles with care might be
done best at the start, but soon after comes a close second. This is not submitting
to fate, like a corpse or prisoner would. It’s about the best future, not about truth.
91

06.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.3: rump without skin, inferior progress, brutal)
Incorporating long-standing virtues
In order to be steadfast
Distressing, but in the end, auspicious
Yet for someone engaged in the royal service
There is no completion
06.3x Incorporating long-standing virtues:
Following the superior (is) promising
Conflicts can leave one shaken, with certainties in doubt and afraid of going too far.
Not all human beings can spend half of life to examine and forge an original ethic.
Society offers a fallback in classical virtues and morals, the compromises already
packaged and approved by the mediocrats and the lowest of common denominators.
Settling early on compromise is not always a good idea, yet it can help you move  on
to your more fruitful pursuits. An original, self-driven life is hard work. This isn’t
always worth all of the effort if one can be better used elsewhere. But the problems
here are not in the lore of these hand me down values and truths. The safe course
is still just one course, but promotes itself, and will go to war, as the one true way.
Those who serve kings should not try to lead. Many more should not try to think.
06.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.4: scattering those groups, claim the high ground)
Not capable of contending
Returning to take up a higher purpose
Withdrawing to secure the certain
Promising
06.4x Returning to take up a higher purpose
Withdrawing to secure the certain:
This is not failure
Imagine that our life is a maze with walls only one meter high, and everyone thinks
that