e Wing set is often far wide of the real Zhouyi, although even its
wilder speculations offer interesting structural refinements and insights. But most of al
l
these “elements [simply] function as a commentary starting point.” (Fendos. p. 132). In
the Yiweishu set, according to Shaughnessy’s thesis:
The two centuries of the Eastern Han marked the first documented fluorescence of
Yijing scholarship. The works of [Ma Rong, Zheng Xuan, Xun Shuang, Lu Ji and Yu Fan ]
fully developed the exigetical techniques of trigram symbolism (ba gua), line position (yao
wei) and line virtue (yao de ) already incipient in the Tuan [Zhuan] and Xiang canonical
commentaries. In addition, such new principles as ‘rising and falling lines’ ( sheng jiang),
hexagrammatic changes (gua bian), internal forms (hu ti) and semi-images (ban xiang) gave
to the basic hexagram structure a virtually infinite malleability by which these scholiasts
could reconcile every aspect of the Yijing with a systematically integrated view of the world.
p. 4 [Here Shaughnessy refers the reader to further study: Qu Wanli, Xianqin Han Wei Yili
shuping, 1969, pp. 77-149 and Gao Huaimin, Liang-Han Yixue shi, 1970].
A large number of the Yiweishu and the Post-Han dimensions are omitted here,
many simply from my own ignorance of their existence and some for their irrelevance, not
to Chinese culture, but to the historical construction of the Yijing. Among the latter are the
Five Agents ( Wu Xing ), the Ten Celestial Stems (Shi Tian G an ), the Twelve Earthly
Branches (Shi Er Di Zhi , touched upon here), the Twenty Eight Houses or Constellations
(Er Shi Ba Gong or Xiu), the Luo River Diagram (Luo Shu, though anticipated in the XCZ),
the Yellow River Map (He Tu ), the Five Notes (Wu Yin), the Twelve Pipe Pitches (Shi E r
Lu) and the Xiang Shu auguristic systems of Cai Yi (concerning natural phenomena) and
Gua Qi (concerning cyclical patterns in Time and Nature, especially calendars).
2

The traditional linear sequence of the chapters (Gua Xu), called the Hou Tian, Wen
Wang or the Later Heaven Sequence, is practically useless in structural analysis and, as
suggested earlier, this uselessness may have been deliberate. Far more useful here is the
Xian Tian or the Primal Heaven Sequence, which was probably never even seen until Shao
Yong (1011-1077) of the Song dynasty. Even this sequence does not display the beauty of
the Yi’s structure until it is arranged in its Ba Gong  or Eight House Arrangement. This is
because the Yi, even from the beginning, never was a lineal sequence: it was a geometry, one
which sought, however unconsciously, whatever could be read into the formula:
(A + B) + (A+B) 2 + (A+B) 3 + (A+B) 6 =
A + B + A 2 + 2AB + B 2 + A3 + 3A2B + 3AB 2 + B3
+ A6 + 6A5B + 15A 4B2 + 20A3B3 + 15A2B4 + 6AB5+ B6
or into the binary matrix:
ox
oxox
ooxx
oxoxoxox
ooxxooxx
ooooxxxx
oxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxoxox
ooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxxooxx
ooooxxxxooooxxxxooooxxxxooooxxxxooooxxxxooooxxxxooooxxxxooooxxxx
ooooooooxxxxxxxxooooooooxxxxxxxxooooooooxxxxxxxxooooooooxxxxxxxx
ooooooooooooooooxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxooooooooooooooooxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
These two expressions contain, by implication, the entire skeletal superstructure of the
Yijing and its many dimensions (in this analogy, the Yi Li dimensions may be seen as the
flesh). They also contain the grammatical structure of the Yijing as a language. Iulian
Shchutskii had an interesting take on looking backwards at the structures of the Yijing with
more modern understanding:
If we speak of beehives, then we must mention t hat their cells are in hexagonal
sections. This is a concept of geometry, but no one will suspect us of an inclination to
ascribe to the bees a knowledge of geometry. If the representatives of a culturally backward
people know how to construct huts out of logs, this still does not mean that they have a
know