wn children. Mothers are particularly suspected of putting a curse on
children while teaching them the secret body rituals. The countermagic of the
witch doctor is unusual in its lack of ritual. The patient simply tells the “listener”
all his troubles and fears, beginning with the earliest difficulties he can remember.
The memory displayed by the Nacerima in these exorcism sessions is truly
remarkable. It is not uncommon for the patient to bemoan the rejection he felt
upon being weaned as a babe, and a few individuals even see their troubles going
back to the traumatic effects of their own birth.
In conclusion, mention must be made of certain practices which have their
base in native aesthetics but which depend upon the pervasive aversion to the
natural body and its functions. There are ritual fasts to make fat people thin and
ceremonial feasts to make thin people fat. Still other rites are used to make
women’s breasts larger if they are small, and sm aller if they are large. General
dissatisfaction with breast shape is symbolized by the fact that the ideal form is
virtually outside the range of human variation. A few women afflicted with al most
inhuman hypermammary development are so idolized that they make a handsome
living going from village to village and permitting the natives to stare at them for
a fee.
Reference has already been made t
o the fact that excretory functions are
routinized and relegated to secrecy. Natural reproductive functions are similarly
distorted. Intercourse is taboo as a topic and scheduled as an act. Efforts are made
to avoid pregnancy by the use of magical materials or by limiting intercourse to
certain phases of the moon. Conception is actually infrequent. When pregnant,
women dress so as to hide their condition. Parturition takes place in secret,
without friends or relatives to assist, and the majority of women do not nurse their
infants.
Our review of the ritual life of the Nacerima has certainly shown them to be
a magic-ridden people. It is hard to imagine how they have managed to exist so
long under the burdens they have imposed upon themselves. But even such
exotic customs as these take on real meaning when they are reviewed with the
insight provided by Malinowski when he wrote:
Looking from far and above, from our high places of safety in the
developed civilization, it is easy to see all the cruelty and irrelevance of m agic.
But without its power and guidance early man could not have mastered his
practical difficulties as he has done, nor could man have advanced to the higher
stages of civilization.
548

The Daoist Farmer
Adapted from the Huainanzi, circa 139 BCE
A farmer named Sei Weng owned a beautiful mare which was praised far
and wide. One day this wonderful horse disappeared. The people of his village
offered sympathy to Sei Weng for his great misfortune. Sei Weng said sim ply,
"What makes you think this is bad?"
A few days later the lost mare returned, followed by a whole herd of wild
horses, led by a beautiful wild stallion. The village congratulated Sei Weng for his
great good fortune. He said, "What makes you think this is good?"
Some time later, Sei Weng's only son, while riding the stallion, fell off and
broke his leg. The village people once again expressed their sympathy at Sei
Weng's misfortune. Sei Weng again said, "What makes you think this is bad?"
Soon after, a war broke out and all the young men of the village except Sei
Weng's lame son were drafted and sent into a horrible battle. The village people
were amazed as Sei Weng's good luck. But Sei Weng only replied, "What makes
you think this is good?"
549

Appendix 2: Humor in the Zhouyi
In 1997, when I first proposed writing an article with this title, I wondered
what ideas others had already happened upon and so I posted an inquiry on
several newsgroups in search of some favorite examples. I was a little shocked to
learn that, while many long-time readers had had several humorous coincidences
and encounters with the Yi