er, mitigate,
deliver, separate, open up, break up, dis perse, interpret, solve, dissolve, resolve,
settle, explain, understand, comprehend, get rid of, be free of, divide; cut or pull
open, apart (s, ed, ing); (a, the) solution(s), liberty, freedom, relief, deliverance,
release, delivery, liberation, disaggregation, disintegration; The character refers to
a knot horn, or a little piece of antler tip that people used to carry around on their
belts to disentangle ropes and untie knots. Like the nautical tool called a fid.
40.T, Tuan Zhuan
Release
Crisis leads to movement
Movement then gets free of crisis
Released
Release favors the west to the south:
To go (is) to gain the multitude
One’s coming return (is) promising:
Here to find the center
(In) having somewhere to go, to be prompt (is) promising:
(In) making progress there will be achievement
Heaven (and) earth let loose as thunder (and) rain get to work
Thunder (and) rain go to work, and hundreds of seed pods
Of plants (and) trees, as one, begin to burst
Release’s opportune timing (is) very important now!294

40.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.1: marrying as a second wife, lame can take steps)
No blame
40.1x Firmness (and) flexibility have a common boundary here
(In) the meaning of no blame
Error, when viewed from its most useful angle, is another kind of intelligence. It is a
usable sort of knowledge, but not a thing that you want to have stuck in your heart
or your mind, else resentment repeats the same sentiment over and over again. This
gets in the way of release and forgiveness, gumming up the next round of changes.
It is not that humans should not be held to account for their errors. But we do seek
the best ways to outgrow them. Fixing blame is just fixing a thing against changes,
to lock up the past, or else drag it with us. If so mething is done, it will not be done
better. We want instead to own our imperfections, and then use our property rights
to correct them. One on the middle path can use all situations; if off center, things on
the far side are too far out of our reach. In balance we can make the best of the bad.
40.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.2: resolved in stone, an unending day)
On the hunt, taking three foxes
Claiming the golden arrow
Persistence is timely
40.2x Nine second’s persistence (is) promising:
Finding the middle path
His training with bow and arrow was a way to center and focus his mind, to go to
the heart of the matter. He trained his aim to be true. But this did not work only in
theory. Out in the field, he has a day worth recording. He finds both the zone and
the flow - the flights of the arrows are seen in the sighting. He brings the three foxes
home with three shots and the lord awards him the arrow of bronze. Of course this
arrow is about the worst thing to hunt with, and it’s not that much better for targets.
This thing is no more than a symbol, to commemorate this day. If he is not careful,
it could come to symbolize the day he could never let go of. But an ace, three times
over, should know this already. Then let him convert the honor to confidence, rather
than pride, then the foxy, thieving, cunning sneaks will not regain their advantage.
295

40.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.3: lacking continuous character, continuing thus)
Shouldering baggage while riding
Inviting robbers to approach
Persistence is embarrassing
40.3x Shouldering baggage while riding:
And further, inviting derision
* Of our own accord to encourage hostility -
Given this, who is to blame?
An upstart in this new, richer world, he carries the same ragged, wanderer’s pack
on his back, while driving his fancy, new carriage. Newly well-to-do, he gives up
none of his past, as if to show others how far he has come, so he will not drop his
old baggage. His recent good fortune may not be ill-gotten, but he does risk it being
ill-held. The bandits will gladly deliver him, release him from all these new b