not interact
And so the myriad beings do not communicate
High (and) low do not interact
And so all under heaven lack government
Within (is) darkness and without (is) light
Within (is) weakness and without (is) strength
Within (are) the common people and without (is) the noble young one
The common people’s principles prevail
The noble young one’s principles fade
126

12.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.1: with no pretense, to go forward is promising)
Pulling up thatch grass roots
And with this, another cluster
Persistence is promising and satisfying
12.1x Pulling up thatch grass, persistence (is) promising:
The purpose remains noble
Things just begin to feel and go wrong. Already a cluster of citizens know it, but it
isn’t the old and wise ones: it’s mostly young sprouts, and a handful of older artists
and poets. The network begins underground, to counter the culture. As if informed
by some hidden connections, they begin to uproot and then to transplant themselves.
The fabric of things connected already makes up in microcosm a new, little culture
and seed for the mulch of the past. Radical means from the root, and so it is true that
this group gets carried away before wisdom has come to full bloom. But what they
leave behind is in an advanced decay and away is where they should go, a homeless
band of refugees, not yet wise to tactics and stratagems, yet mature enough to get out
from under a failing system. The tribe they now belong to is far, far older than this.
12.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.2: unable to contend, village escapes suffering)
Embracing servitude
The common one’s promise
Is the mature one’s worthless fulfillment
12.2x The mature one’s worthless fulfillment:
Avoid the herd’s distractions
The decadent civilization makes up a world all its own. Its principles and its truths
will define themselves into existence and just hang there with nothing to stand on,
with only a little past and a little less future, in some void between heaven and earth.
Its laws are its order and its coin its religion. A sage will lose most of his family, and
mature human beings will question their own mental health. The people are sold on
their sins and then get sold on salvation. And whoever holds praise and forgiveness
is master. Want some roundabout power? Establish your place in a victimized class,
then come forth to claim special privilege. The system is rigged, there is no way to
get free here. So how do you win with self-rule forbidden, when you prize a clear
conscience above the rules of the game? You do a great job choosing your battles.
127

12.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.3: tangled retreat, anxiety, distress, manage help)
Embracing the unworthy
12.3x Embracing the unworthy:
The position is not appropriate
We all have heard some story of a man who loses his life while saving a dog or a
chicken. Society does this too when it loses sight of objectives and tries to move
past selection. They will scold: Don’t be judgmental, or ask: Why be so negative?
All things are relatives to all other things, in the interest of fairness, all things are just
being equal. Buried under this hooey is a primate’s cortex that begs them to stop
and look to first needs first. But the lowest common denominator does not want to
hurt its brain, so looters and leaders weigh the same, principles go unchallenged,
excellence is perversely rejected and authority cannot even question itself. Simply
existing has the same value as working a lifetime on merit. Sometimes there is a
great weakness in numbers. You must have a value to say that this is not worth it.
12.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.4: observe country’s splendors, visit the sovereign)
Having higher purpose is not a mistake
But this kind of thing differs from happiness
12.4x Having higher purpose is not a mistake:
The intentions (are) carried out
There are higher laws than the kingdom’s, higher mandates and purpose