e stone carry the day. Just don’t carry that stone.
151

16.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness In Excess
(Fan Yao 62.3: never beyond defense, maybe attack from behind)
Wide-eyed readiness is regrettable
The slow will have regrets
16.3x Wide-eyed readiness will have regrets:
The position is not appropriate
There is nothing wrong with getting inspired when looking up to heroes and idols.
Most of the time there will be higher powers and purposes than those we make up
ourselves. But when the spirit is thought to be up on the altar and not down deep in
the heart, the values may get all turned around. Soon the warrior is led by his sword,
the scribe is led by his stylus, and the poor puppeteer gets jerked all around by his
dummies. Movement and motive come from within, but idols won’t tell you when.
Imagine you want to pursue higher learning and believe that the only way is to get
yourself put into school. This way of getting things done looks much to externals
and to others for orders. Try showing initiative here. And if you must move yourself
by using inanimate objects, then take a long pole and prod yourself from behind.
16.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.4: tied up in a bag, no blame, no praise)
At the springs of readiness
There is much to have and to gain
Do not hesitate
Companions are gathered as hair by a clasp
16.4x (At) the springs of readiness,
(with) much to have (and) to gain:
The aims (are) fully developed
He stands up to rally the cheering host, with a great embrace for all whom he sees,
drawing friends together as a comb gathers hair, sweeping them into one direction,
and pinning them with and to common hope. When the timing is just right and the
crowd is ready to make its music and dance, one little gesture will affirm all of life.
All the conductor needs is a tiny little wand, then whole waves of readiness follow.
Even down off the dais, and not in the ruler’s place, a responsive timing and sense
will rouse a people to movement. Who is at the center of things does not matter, but
the circulation does, as the heart is not an organ for hoarding the body’s best blood.
Inspiration is breathing. Choice is most real at exactly the place where it has the least
weight or inertia and the mind can move things around with simple yesses and noes.
152

16.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.5: convening assumes position, not the confidence)
Persistent affliction
Chronic but not fatal
16.5x Six fifth’s persistent affliction:
Relying upon firmness
* Chronic but not fatal
The middle is not yet passed
He lies down to welcome a cure. What can he want and be hoping for here? To keep
company with the healers? They are such a spirited lot! What is it about our illness
and suffering that leads us to spend so m uch time here? How is this an expression
of proactive life? The healer will have many questions. Is it b etter to feel something
than nothing? Do you keep a disease just to rally a struggle for life, knowing that the
spirit and will are forces that heal? Are there guilt and penitence here? Investment in
cherished wounds? Is this one mistaking a fever for fervor? Does he just need a rest,
friends, or some pity? Has this become known, secure and familiar? Isn’t a ne utral
condition about the best the afflicted can hope for? Why does the victim hang on so
when it’s best to forgive and let go? Should one of the shamans drum on his head?
16.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.6: advancing antlers, limit to one's home town)
Blind readiness
Achieving while assuming setbacks
Avoids errors
16.6x Blind readiness at the top:
How could this be continued?
The experience is over your head, with so much more power than you, bigger, higher
than you could summit alone. You might think something rash and suspect a divine
intervention, or think that you have met with the ultimate truth, or at least found the
way to the top. You are born again now. Is it still too soon to ask where this new life
wi