the stuff
that gets in the way of tomorrow, letting gravity do the work of hauling this all away.
23.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.4: advance like a rodent, persistence is dangerous)
Stripping the bed for its flesh
Ominous
23.4x Stripping the bed for (its) flesh:
Cutting close to disaster
The natural consequence of unsustainable behavior is in extinction of that behavior.
The sleeper awakens to very bad news. Many do not wish him well here and carry
the weapons to prove it. There are even a few he thought were his friends, including
his chief of security. They say he was given fair warning about being a greedy rat,
but somehow he needed their envy. If reasons and pleas cannot pierce his covers,
then maybe the knives and swords will. Even as too late as yesterday, his fortunes
might have turned. To have given it all away back then was a bargain. Gravity has
the force of a law: you can do many things inside its structure and even find ways
to fly. But gravity now describes this one’s plight, and soon there might be a grave
to sleep in. This is cutting things far too closely: just hope this is merely prediction.
194

23.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.5: observing our own lives, a noble does no harm)
A stringline of fishes
By way of the palace inhabitants’ sponsorship*
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
23.5x By way of the palace inhabitants’ sponsorship:
An outcome with no complaints
With an ugly breakdown of order in progress, the rebels march up to the wealthier
parts of the town. Because our subject lives in a tower,  and his tower sits high up on
the hill, the rebels might think to take this one down too. So they march up the hill
with their stones. But this one’s servants have been treated well, and greet the rebels
at the front door and invite them in for hot baths and refreshments, and wise stories
told by His Lordship. Witnesses here attest to his character. The rebels straighten
and dust off their clothes, and prepare for rational talk. An astronomer,  philosopher
and a noble: who’d have guessed it? He has done his best when he could have done
only his most. The past catches up and it isn’t so b ad. They make him an honorary
rebel. It is great to have friends in low places too. Someone went  fishing with chum.
23.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.6: dragons war in wilds, bleeding indigo and golden)
The ripest fruit is not eaten*
The noble young one gains ground
As the common people tear down their own shacks*
23.6x The noble young one gains ground:
The people (are) those who uphold (one)
* (As) the common people tear down (their own) shacks:
In the end not fit to be used
The tree has been thoroughly shaken and picked, and gravity did its duty as well.
The only fruit remaining is spared for its ripe old age, the fittest and best example,
the one that none will begrudge. The one thought too green, too high or not worth
the effort will find its way down to the soil. It’s just how things will shake out, the
most natural selection. The hasty are consumed. When decomposition goes this far
things will soon work themselves out. The angry mob runs riot, and burns its own
slum to the ground. The lord of the land gets his l and back oddly unspoiled, made
fertile again by the ashes. The rebellion burns itself out. This does not need to call
itself justice. It is merely appropriate for unsustainable things to self-destruct now.
The rot will only attack the weak, the worms get at the dead fruit, the seed is set free.
195

23, Dimensions  
pang tong gua (opposite): 43, Guai, Decisiveness 
qian gua (inverse): 24, Fu, Returning 
jiao gua (reverse): 15, Qian, Authenticity 
hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting 
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 08, 20, 03, 42 
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 9th Moon (Oct) 
 
23, Notes  
* 23.1,2 The addition of such points to an ambiguity: your persistence or theirs? 
* 23.5 This seems to be a lost historical reference to a popular uprising aga