me of the principles given here may
also be helpful in better understanding other examples of the Yijing’s important words and
concepts). Each name is meant to cover one part in sixty-four of the human experience. The
(fictitious) image was offered earlier of a large set of jars to contain the Zhouyi authors’
working notes. Needham, Crowley and others have already suggested the filing system
metaphor. The notion that these names are operationally defined abstracts, which was
brought up earlier in revisiting the Lacouperie/Conrady lexical theory, is not a new idea here
either. Helmut Wilhem calls the purpose of this “to establish collectively valid images.”
(Heaven, Earth & Man, p. 201) and writes:
It is an interesting phenomenon that many of these conceptual names of hexagrams are so-
called hapax legomena; they do not occur in the earlier literature at places other than these
names, and a number of them have never been used in the later literature except in passages
directly derivative from these hexagrams. What we observe here is apparently an attempt to
create and formulate concepts for specific purposes, if not to define them. We stand witness
here to the first manifestation of a new stage in the self-realization of the human mind in
which the faculty of judgment is first exercised and leads to abstractions distinct from
images ... . It would be a fallacy ... to reduce these concepts to their image antecedents and
to deny the authors of these early texts the faculty o
f abstraction that is reflected in these
terms ... . p. 200
Once conceived, the term then took on a life of its own, feeding on and being fed by
those regions of the human mind that are given to abstractions ... . In the course of this
development, the origin of the term has become more and more meaningless and eventually
entirely forgotten. [p. 204] [I have underlined origin for the benefit of the modern context
critics and etymologists who seem so reluctant to observe this process and insist upon using
“Piglet” as a translation for Dun and “Elephant Dance” for Yu, though these make no
sense at all].
Another analogy might view these Gua Ming terms as ‘gravitational centers’ within the
imagination, attracting meanings to themselves in proportion both to their own mass and a
potential new meaning’s proximity, and forming a system out of chaotic clouds much as
our own solar system formed. Particles too distant, or with too much mass or inertia of their
own, would escape this attraction. These particles array or cluster themselves into an open
set of Key Words, wherein ‘A’ is seldom equal to ‘B.’ These are correspondence sets, not
equivalence sets. The weak spot in this analogy is that there is frequently no single, perfect
8

word or association which occupies the exact center, or the whole periphery, of the meaning.
Often the most useful name is one which bridges the broadest gaps between the meanings.
Or: think of staking out a new territory. No single stake will cover the range (unless
that range be too small to graze or farm). And the more stakes one sets, the fewer are the
subsequent boundary disputes. The neighbors’ versions of the boundaries are given equal
weight when one goes to the higher order. Such ‘definition’ of a wide range of meanings
by connotative Key Words is common to all languages with a closed or finite number of
vocabulary elements. Here the analogy’s weak spots are that stakes are as often placed at
landmarks within the terrain and that these terms are often not defined entirely by
circumscription or definition: they also take on meanings according to their abilities to
combine and interrelate, or to be permuted or extrapolated from. And they are often defined
by references points far outside of their own domain, by their position in an overall pattern.
The boundaries here define starting points, or places to return to. Their intent is not the
compression of meaning but rather its expansion into the remaining dimensions: to open the
mind