e altered states. Sometimes a whole new being or
species is only one of its steps. But the rapture and challenge of such an exaltation
will carry no heavy old goals. And perhaps some things will need to be lost up here.
Perhaps this pushes us upwards: to lose the stuff that’s not needed. This is what is
conquered, transcended and left behind. Someone who thinks to have conquered the
summit can’t even get over an inferior delusion. This is the blindness to watch for.333

46, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 25, Wu Wang, Without Pretense
qian gua (inverse): 45, Cui, Collectedness
jiao gua (reverse): 20, Guan, Perspective
hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
46, Notes
* 46.0 The direction faced when giving orders or assuming command.
* 46.4 Mount Qi, or Split Mountain, was the site of the Zhou dynasty ancestral
shrine. Beside it was the homeland of the Zhou family ancestors. This is a zhi Gua
reference (Gua 32: Heng, Continuity). Success is a function of alignment and con-
sistency with the momentum of one’s past, or one’s experience and expertise.
46, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Hod in Assiah
* Tarot: Eight of Pentacles
* Astrology: Mercury in Earth
46, Quotations
* Whatever you can do, or dream you can - begin it.
Boldness has genius, power and magic in it.—Goethe
* The safest opportunity for the average man to seize is hard work.
—Arthur Brisbane
* The world was always yours; you would not take it. —Archibald MacLeish
* A wise man will make more opportunities than he finds. —Francis Bacon
* What is work? And what is not work?  are questions that perplex the wisest of
men. —The Bhagavad Gita
* Let us reverse the values: All fitness the result of fortunate organization, all
freedom the result of fitness. —Nietzsche, WTP
* Chance favors the prepared mind. —Louis Pasteur
* I have always believed, and I still believe, that whatever good or bad fortune
may come our way we can always give it meaning and transform it into
something of value. —Hermann Hesse
334

GUA 47, KUN4, EXHAUSTION
 
  Binary 010 110 = 22; Kan below, Dui above
47.X, Overall Image
A lake without water
Exhaustion
The noble young one, accordingly,
invokes a higher purpose to carry out intentions
The lake drains into the deep, the tide goes out, the living powers ebb. There is little
left to enjoy but smelly fish and slimy mud and those slippery and thorny personal
truths, biting each other and making those sucking sounds. Joy is in serious trouble
and gratitude seems to be too hard to find. Even the wise ones can suffer these ebbs.
The exhausted sage is reminded that, to follow his will so completely, he risks both
his life and his sanity. He wants to rejoice but is empty. One dream or one drive is
all he has juice for. But where he finds his resources discharged, he may yet reach
for resources not his own. And when caught in quicksand or mud, floating is best.
47.0, Exhaustion
“Fulfillment”
“Persistence”
For the mature human being, a promise,
Not a mistake
But having the words is not the conviction
It seems only human to drape our stranger mysteries in gothic and romantic veils,
but the foolish and the fatigued will invest the witch moon with too much mystique.
When the tides go out or power recedes, once happy people moan about falseness
and vanishing meaning, denying their lives with their words or bewailing that all the
world is null and refuted. Things from these dark, pre-verbal depths are given new
voices, even dark fears about one’s own light. The power to rule them goes out with
the tide. The sage, not unknown in this world, is exhausted in times of exhaustion,
but he feels no bitterness, makes no speeches and speaks no promises that he hasn’t
the power to keep. He learns how to call upon primeval powers to float himself up
and out of this muck. The greater part of this burden is just simple self-indulgence.
Ill-will, resentment, rancor and enmity will all try to look like truth, though the truths