e Fan Yao 21.6 warns against the perils of ignorance, the consequence of ignor-
ing information, which might here be found even in the least likely place. Take the
free opportunity, apprender en cabeza ajena, to learn in another’s head.
51, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Atziluth of Atziluth
* Tarot: King of Wands
* Astrology: Aries Ascending, Mutable Fire
51, Quotations
* Which of us listens to the hymn of a brook when the tempest speaks?
—Kahlil Gibran
* Yet I know that I dwell in the midst of the roar / of the Cosmic Wheel /
In the hot collision of Forces, and the clangor /  of Boundless Strife /
Mid the sound of the speed of worlds, the rushing / worlds, and the peal /
Of the thunder of Life. —William Watson, “Dawn on the Headland”
* I want to have goblins about me, for I am courageous. The courage which scareth
away ghosts createth goblins for itself - it wanteth to laugh. I no longer feel in com-
mon with you; the very cloud which I see beneath me, the blackness and heaviness at
which I laugh - that is your thundercloud. Not by wrath, but by laughter do we slay.
Come, let us slay the spirit of gravity! I learned to walk; since then have I let myself
run. I learned to fly; since then I do not need pushing in order to move from a spot.
—Nietzsche, TSZ #7
* It’s not the thing you fear – it’s the mother of the thing you fear. —Mary Oliver
* Adversity in immunological doses has its uses; more than that crushes.
—John Updike
364

GUA 52, GEN4, STILLNESS
 
  Binary 001 001 = 09; Gen below, Gen above; Chong Gua
52.X, Overall Image
Adjacent mountains
Stillness
The noble young one, accordingly,
contemplates nothing outside of its place
The real is contained within the obvious and apparent. Appearance is but an overlay
to the real. Quietly awaiting the hand and skill of a master to strip away the ordinary,
the lump of clay, the virgin block and the stone already contain the masterpiece. The
sage, like the potter and sculptor, attends only the matter at hand, appreciating what
it is and letting it stand forth. The mountain range is like a spine. The pivotal points
do not move. The mountains at rest host their forests, valleys and streams. The axles,
axes and hubs do not move, but are central to the functioning of the things revolving
around them. The young noble seeks his center. and what is implicit in having one.
52.0, Stilling one’s spine
Not grasping one’s own being
Moving through one’s courtyard
But not seeing other people
No blame
When the time has come to recapture the center of being, the peripheral life must
wait, the family and the society too. He straightens himself in his calm, stacking the
bones of his spine in a balance, training his gaze on the backs of his eyelids, staking
his thoughts to his place in the moment. He puts himself into his proper place and
position. The lump, the block, the stone he appears to be already contains the best
he can be, if he can strip away the extraneous and unlearn those things which do not
belong and find the best shape for the rest. He seems to be lost in his thoughts, but a
loss of one’s center is the real meaning of lost. From the middle of his implicitness,
and all of its implications, he delivers the one he can be from illusion and what he
cannot from thought. He cannot define himself in this way. The boundaries which
define him will be found in his interactions. The self-absorbed space is a place to be
outgrown. He cannot figure out where he is without referring to his context. Finding
the center is merely the optimum place to begin, or to begin all over again. Progress
is not the point yet. This is taking a moment to learn if he’s even on the right path.
365

52.M, Key Words
Check, restrain, resist, confine, delimit, define, discipline; to hold against change
Straightforward, forthright, honest, present, steadfast, anchored, rooted, grounded
Concentration, introspection, reflection, meditation, quietude, self-containment
Prepossession, reserve, balance, stability, equilibrium, poise; the m