book. And so it is a good thing to
look for the center in the midst of a cluster of words. Two other images may help, and both
of these are related to probability laws: In certain athletic competitions where individual
performances are rated by a number of judges, the high and low scores are often eliminated
before an average of the remaining scores is taken. Prejudice, or premature judgment, is one
of the reasons for this. In collect
ing the Key Words for this edition and editing them to a
manageable number, it served a purpose to eliminate a great number of peripheral ideas,
especially those where aspects or other meanings are shared by other terms. Deferred
gratification, for instance, is a theme common to many a Gua. But this does not mean that
peripheral ideas do not belong within the territory. The Key Word study is meant to help
one to get the mind around the entire center. But expansion from here is still necessary.
Second image: In the learning of archery, in the truing of one’s aim, one might first shoot a
whole quiver full of arrows and only then assess the pattern. Not all shots are equidistant.
Usually it will be the approximate center of the pattern which locates the center of one’s
aim. This will probably not be the arrow found in the neighbor’s yard or cow (the rooster
was something different). The next step is to fine tune the stance, and the follow through,
and the point of focus, moving this point of aim eventually towards the center of the target.
This process is also zhong, depicting a bullseye and meaning both true and center.
As described earlier in the hypothetical history, the known range of a term’s meanings
both grows and shrinks over time, and it does so according to both deductive and inductive
logic, both theoretical and empirical input. This process is much like life - now divergent
and diastolic, now convergent and systolic. The word meanings are grown first and then
pruned back, added to whenever one gets a bright idea or deleted from whenever an idea
fails to pass its tests against big Substance. “Turning and returning is the Dao.” I
n the
broader context of Yixue, the Yijing’s vocabulary elements are far less fixed than its various
10

structural elements. To the extent that the Yi is a language, its thesaurus is a loose-leafed
notebook rather than a scripture. Yixue is an evolving tradition.
The range of the Xiao G ua (Small Symbol) meanings is fairly well scoped in the
Glossary and in Xiao Gua. Perhaps the best place to begin to learn the Gua Ming  is in the
Glossary. All of the Gua Names, or at least all of their components, may be found here. The
Key Words section in the Translation is a little more adventurous, liberal and anachronistic.
In Xiao Gua, under the Ba Gua, Glosses From the Text, the Zhouyi and Wing texts have
been combed for Chinese glosses and synonyms to the Trigram meanings. The bulk of
these came from the Chong (Repeated Trigram) Gua, discussed later. But in all of the more
complex Gua the same thing can be done as an exercise: the text of every Gua (with its
Wing commentaries) offers at least a few of these glosses and synonyms. This exercise will
prove especially valuable in cases where the Gua Ming is used only once, in the Gua Ci, or
is not repeated in the Yao Ci in a variety of contexts (this happens at Gua 02, 09, 11, 14, 26,
61, 63 & 64). Normally the Gua Ming is introduced as a word (or a word combination)
which stands alone out of context. It is only at Gua 10, 12, 13 & 52 where a Name makes
its entry embedded in textual syntax. In Old Chinese, having syntax and a context to work
with is almost as useful as having a dictionary.
Dichotomy, in a couple of its many forms, was used by the Zhouyi authors to help
define a Gua Ming  against, or in contrast with, that of a structurally 
resonant partner. The
structures used here were most often the dimensions of Inverse Hexagrams (Qian Gua) and
Opposite Hexagrams (Pang Tong Gua ) elaborated upon later. Some of these are