derably fewer in number than later analysis would
postulate, would not be pointed out. In fact, most of the tracks leading back to
the authors and their methods would be covered up. Even the arrangement of the
diagrams in the original eight-by-eight grid (which was very probably not the
Xian Tian) would be scrambled. The only remaining clear hint of the greater order
would be in the sequence of the chapters, and even this would be half-scrambled.
All of this structure would remain primarily an oral tradition, to be kept within the
school. This would be done for two simple reasons. The aura of mystery would
help to prevent tampering and other such forms of abuse. And the students of this
work who were not yet able or ready to comprehend the complexities of a multi-
dimensional text would not be so completely overwhelmed. All of the order and
symmetry which was necessary for this broader comprehension was implicit in the
structure of the diagrams themselves. When the readers were ready, they would
rediscover it on their own. Also, due to this implicit structure, the system would be
capable of rectifying itself in the event of corruption. The reasons for this caution
would be vividly, and even humorously, demonstrated centuries later in the over-
elaborated obsessiveness of the Confucian and Xiang Shu schools, who became
so busy interpreting the structures, both real and i maginary, that they missed out
on most of the meaning of the text. This strategy was to backfire as w ell, though
there was, still to come, an overreaction to the obsession with hidden structure,
which led to the centuries-long dismissal of structure. It would seem that a mere
book can only accomplish so much. The middle way, Zhong Dao, is explicitly
indicated in numerous ways, and prescribed dozens of times throughout the
Yijing. This does not, however, guarantee the maturity of its readers, who must
then take it upon themselves to grow up and synthesize the opposites.
The foregoing account is, of course, not much more than historical fiction,
sketched around a few historical persons, places and dates, and leaning somewhat
in the direction of traditional accounts, still useful until the challengers of t hese
accounts assume more of their rightful burden of proof. When we delete the
questionable, the fabulous, the legend and myth, we are left with next 
to nothing.
I merely wanted to provide what I considered to be a more plausible and human-
istic account to fill some of this void, and in the process try to make at least two
things clear:
The Image-and-Number and the Meaning-and-Principle schools both found
little meaningful pieces of the general puzzle, but stumbled on a problem which is
inherent in the nature of all belief: arrogance, the perceived truth becomes an end
to learning. This common human frailty has nowhere been better described than
in the old Sufi story of The Blind Men and the Elephant, rendered so poetically in
English by John Godfrey Saxe, included in Appendix 1, Lessons for the Scholars.
When we stop asking questions we stop growing. The elephant, which we are so
certain is a rope or a fan, a spear or a tree, a wall or a snake, wanders away. Yet
we still do not have a clue to its nature, only a handful of ridiculous hypotheses
512

turned prematurely into theories and theses to be defended at all costs. The Yijing
is above all else a book by and for Questioners, not Answerers.
Second, the Yijing is not, and never has been, a static legacy. It was not just
written once and then carved in stone. It is a book of Changes. It came out of a
tradition with a history, through a process of synthesis, and moved onward with a
dedicated purpose. That purpose continues to evolve, both as and whenever we
do. It is a book about facing the future responsibly. It is about moving thr ough
life’s changes with anxiety put in its proper place in the much greater scheme of
things. It is thus not a w ild claim to call it the first self-help book of psychology,
al