Their value is
in their spending, in losing them to your own best advantage. If you already knew
this, and it was known that you knew this, then perhaps the one who gave them up
knew they would not be wasted. Believe no more than you’ll need to believe here.
41.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.6: authentic commitment, promising, nothing wrong)
Avoiding decrease increases one
Not a mistake
Persistence is opportune
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
But one gains servants rather than family
41.6x Avoiding decrease increases one:
A well-earned objective
When wealth is not bound to inferior rules, giving and taking both lead to a profit.
An economy slowly builds itself up when its circulation is free. Anyone can prosper
at times, but in order to sustain this without relying on undiminishing growth rates
there are a few rules and prerequisites. Those who are in charge must be kept in a
position to lose everything that they own: never leave them unaccountable for their
errors in their judgment. Then tax what you want less of and not what you would
increase. If government and management exist to solve our problems, then to tax
away the problems will shrink these burdens down. Learn to gain in ways where
everyone wins and learn to lose to advantage. Remember that a shrinking demand
mimics the growth of supply. And never forget that the greater good includes you.
303

41, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 31, Xian, Reciprocity
qian gua (inverse): 42, Yi, Increasing
jiao gua (reverse): 31, Xian, Reciprocity
hu gua (nuclear): 24, Fu, Returning
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
41, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Assiah of Briah
* Tarot: Princess of Cups
* Astrology: Caput Draconis in Water
41, Quotations
* You have learnt something. That always feels at first as if you had lost something.
—G. B. Shaw
* Less is more. —Robert Browning
* The ability to simplify means to eliminate the unnecessary so that the necessary
may speak. —Hans Hofmann
* Economy is a distributive virtue and consists not in saving but in selection.
—Edmond Burke
* I started out with nothing. I still have most of it. —Michael Davis
* I wanted to live deep and suck all the marrow out of life ... to drive life into a
corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms. —Thoreau, Walden
* Our life is frittered away by detail ... . Simplify, simplify. —ibid.
* Power provides according to your impeccability.
—Carlos Castaneda, Tales of Power
* Fortune can take from us only what she has given us. —French proverb
* Economy is too late at the bottom of the purse. —Seneca
304

GUA 42, YI4, INCREASING
 
  Binary 100 011 = 35; Zhen below, Xun above
42.X, Overall Image
The wind and the thunder
Increasing
The noble young one, accordingly,
 When seeing the good, as a rule, makes improvements
When having transgressed, as a rule, makes corrections
The breezes seem to run errands for the young sprout below, bringing it windfalls,
food and rain from afar, and later, distributing seed. Opportunities are everywhere.
The tree reaches out at both ends, spreading its roots and its branches, gaining more
access to more of the world. To grow we reach into something greater than we are.
The wise will find plenty of options to build their lives out of choices. And since so
much is available, they can even pick and choose. In growing a better life, they might
even give up as much as they gain, pass by as much as they take, and settle for only
the best, for a single gem instead of twelve rocks. The great cost is paying attention.
42.0, Increasing
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
The air is full of clues to the meaning of life. Our cultures are full of clues to what
we might do with this life. Your gifts will fall to your lot freely given, as if they had
fallen from heaven. But they’ll have no value or meaning until they are wanted and
taken, accepted and put to a use. To gain is to learn how to better receive, to take a
gift with gratitude, to hon