erson walking the straightest of paths, with the best of
intentions and attitudes, the clearest of comprehension, the kindest heart and the
sharpest mind. More than occasionally, the situation itself is outside of one’s
control. This may come up in a reading. Here the advice is often: make a choice to
occupy this niche well by adapting to best advantage, or get out from under the
circumstances by going somewhere else. But try to quit wringing your hands,
rending your garments and weeping about it: since this is only a passing phase,
grieve if you must and then help it past.
There are times in one’s life when the grounds for one’s optimism are not to
be doubted. And there are times when this optimism is purely self-fulfilling and,
for this reason alone, should not be doubted. Where the Yijing points to troubles
ahead, in the midst of one of these upswings, it may only be indicating a hiccup, a
minor and temporary setback. This points out the importance of specifying a span
of time in the framing of one’s question. The inquirer will be investigating the net
changes, or lessons to be applied, across this specified span of time.
There are 64 possible configurations of changing lines for each of the Gua or
Hexagrams, including no change, and so there are 64
2 or 4096 possible responses
to any given inquiry. But the quantity  of verbal content for each response is
fixed, and often fragmentary. Sometimes this content will be more than one needs
to read and there is only one word, or number, in the text which seems relevant.
And sometimes there is less: if this is the case, and imaginative extrapolation fails
to fill in the blanks, a foray into the Matrix translation may be warranted, even for
the novice. This will provide a number of alternative translations for each word
and phrase in the introductory translation. There will also be cases where the
Changing Line text seems to contradict the Hexagram text, at least in tone or
mood. Where this occurs, the Changing Line text should be viewed as the most
relevant to the crux or thick of the change, the attitude at that point in time where
the choice is made.
49

List of Abbreviations
##. Gua, or hexagram, number
#. Ba Gua, or trigram, number
.M Gua Ming, the hexagram name or title
.m Mawangdui manuscript
.0 Gua Ci, the original or Zhou Yi Hexagram Text
.# Yao Ci, the original or Zhou Yi Changing Line Text, numbers 1-6
.T Tuan Zhuan, or Commentary on the Judgment, the 1st and 2nd 
Wings or Appendices
.X Da Xiang, or Overall Image, part of the 3rd and 4th Wings
.x Xiao Xiang, or Little Images, part of the 3rd and 4th Wings
.xc Xi Ci Zhuan, the Commentary on the Appended Phrases, a.k.a.
Da Zhuan, the Great Commentary, the 5th and 6th Wings
.wy Wen Yan Zhuan, Commentary on Words of the Text, the 7th Wing
.sg Shuo Gua, the Explanation of the Trigrams, the 8th Wing
.xg Xu Gua, the Sequence of the Hexagrams, the 9th Wing
.zg Za Gua, the Assorted or Miscellaneous Hexagrams, the 10th Wing
O Rou
I Gang
W Tai Yin
R Shao Yang
Y Tai Yang
H Shao Yin
101 (5) The Trigram as a binary number (Decimal Equivalent)
101 010 (42) The Hexagram as a binary number (Decimal Equivalent)
F The final use of a word
HL The only occurrence of a word
P Paragraph break
S Sentence break
* Parsing break
BCE Before Current Era
CE Current Era
Zhouyi The original Changes (1100-800 BCE)
Yijing The Changes, with the Ten Wings
Yi or The Changes as a tradition, The Yi Learning or Yi Studies
Yixue
4321 4-digit numbers refer to character entries in Harvard’s
Mathews Chinese-English Dictionary
50

The Zhouyi and the First Four Wings of the Yijing
In Simple, Literal Translation
With the Rogue River Commentaries
And Miscellaneous Notes
51

Introductory Notes
The simple translation here in Part One attempts a literal, word-by-word
translation of the “received text” of the Yijing, from the Chinese Imperial Edition of
1715, the Zhouyi Zhezhong , substantially as found in the Harvard-Yenching
Institute's Zhouyi Yinde (1935) and in Z.D. Su