n from the
section immediately preceding, in the Gua Ci or the Yao Ci . These are the words which are
italicized in Part One. Where the number is underlined this is the first occurrence of a
character which is described in more detail in the main part of the Glossary. Use this number
to search for characters.
4) This column contains one of two kinds of numbers. If this is the first appearance of
the character in the text, this number will contain a plus (+) sign (e.g. 109+13). The number
found before the plus sign gives the conventional number of this character’s "radical" or
root component. The number after the sign gives the number of additional strokes added to
the radical (plus or m inus a stroke since some people count differently). This is the way
many Chinese dictionaries are accessed. This will not work in a "modern" dictionary with
simplified characters, and where some of the classical characters were edited out of the
language itself. If this character has already appeared in the text, the number in this column
will contain a decimal point (e.g 08.1 or 08.X).  This gives the location of the character’s
first entry or appearance historically in the Yijing, that is, first in the Zhouyi, and then in the
Wings. For example, if a character’s first appearance is at 01.1x (in the Xiao Xiang or the
Third Wing) one may infer that the character did not appear at all in the Zhouyi. This word,
by the way, is the familiar yang, as in yin and 
yang, which many people wrongly assume has
been with the Yi from the beginning.
51

5) This column gives the location of the character’s next appearance in the Yi, once
again, first in the Zhouyi and then in the Wings. This feature is meant to take the place of a
concordance, so that the use of a word can be traced throughout the remaining book. In
cases where a word is used frequently, this space is simply left blank after the first few
occurences. But these words will be found in the Glossary, where there is given a range of
alternative English translations greater than that of the sum of their Matrix occurrences. If
you are using an electronic version of the Matrix you will find it easier to use the Find
command and the four-digit Mathews number to track the occurrences of a word. The letter
"F" in this column means that this is the Final occurrence of the word. The letters "HL"
indicate that the word is an Hapax Legomenon (in a lesser sense of the term), a word used
only once in the Yijing.
6) This column offers an average of three or four alternative English translations of
the Chinese word as the word i s shaped by this specific context . Commas here usually
separate interchangeable alternatives, while the semicolons separate slightly different
syntactic or grammatical options. Words in parentheses are either alternative modifiers, or
optional in an English rendering, or strictly inferred English grammar, or indicators of a
specific facet of an English word. A word in brackets indicates an anachronistic English
translation, not  suitable for use in translation, but still informative, or an explanatory
comment. Up and Down pointers (^v) indicate that the word order may be reversed in the
English translation. This is most often the case with the post-positioning of the Chinese
prepositions. A plus sign (+) in this column means that you will find more notes and glosses
on this character in the Glossary segment oddly titled "Characters not in the Glossary."
7) At the far right, in cases where a phrase is repeated elsewhere in the Yi,
 a number
will give the location of the phrase’s next occurrence, with ditto marks below to indicate
the extent of the phrase. The last occurrence of a phrase points cyclically back to the first.
The versatile and oft-repeated wu jiu (no blame, not bad, nothing wrong, without a mistake,
not a mistake, make no mistakes, no harm done, etc.) may be tracked through the Zhouyi by
following jiu in column 5, from its first occurrence at 01.3.
At the end of the Matrix