ixue field.
Most of the material available in English is based upon translations from
the English; and the most frequently used sources for these versions are earlier
works by Legge, Wilhelm and Blofeld. There remains only a handful of authors
who have studied the book in Chinese. This is not to say that fresh insights are
precluded, or even unwelcome, without a basic grasp of the original Chinese.
Indeed, on the whole, and seriously, scholars working both 
in and from the
Chinese language have not fared a great deal better than westerners in grasping
the nature of the work. We come to our studies with a limited ken and
preconceptions: this is the problem, regardless of our mother tongues. But among
the translations done from English, three problems are more likely to be
compounded: 1) Words which are added in translation to make a deliciously terse
original make sense with English grammar are often assumed to occur in the
original. For example, Chinese makes little distinction between a and the, his and
her, one or many, was and will be or do and be done to. These additions will tend
to color all further interpretations. 2) Where the source translation misses the layer
of humor in the original, this may be lost for a very long time. Humor in the Yi is
frequent and often very subtle or dry. It is almost never noticed or pointed out,
although it may constitute as much as ten to fifteen percent of the book. What is
it in the m inds of “scowlers,” if I might be permitted Asimov’s sp elling, that
causes them to fly past this and lose yet another great opportunity to laugh at
themselves? Even this claim that humor exists here can shock and even offend
some students of the Yijing. Please refer to Appendix 2, Humor in the Zhouyi, for
a more careful treatment of the subject. 3) Anachronisms are often added by
translators and these can be compounded in reinterpretation, especially in the
area of philosophical “upgrades” to make the book conform to the latest cultural
beliefs, especially religious, social and 
political. These various upgrades have been
10

working hard to insinuate themselves into the Yi since the Confucian era. Many
translations rely heavily on the early work of missionaries and we have seen what
these people are capable of. Similarly, no amount of social “progress” should
force the ancient Zhouyi to advocate for such things as democracy, feminism and
equalitarianism. The Yijing is quite clear and specific in its recommendations for
meritocracy (a notion which may have been implemented a little in the Early
Zhou but did not really flower until the Han, and which bears a little resemblance
to Thomas Jefferson’s “Natural Aristocracy”). Right and duty are inextricably
woven together with and proportionate to merit ( gong, de, xian, etc.), and to all of
the hard work on worth which the cultivation of m erit entails. There are also real
differences here between the sexes, although these are not, as it is often assumed
given the Chinese cultural context, differences of superiority.
Having recently studied more than two hundred works in English on the
Book of Changes, including translations, interpretations, commentaries, articles
and summaries, I have found a need to make a few comments about the body of
material which has attached itself to the Yi, and to convey, in the process, why I
did not despair of the prospects and need for this present volume.
More than half of what is now available falls into a single group: “new
age” knockoffs, gimmick books and fli ghts of fancy. This was a disappointing
part of the research, but I stubbornly clung to this idea: Even the nut with the net
chasing fairies might still have something to say, and the drool washes off. So to
be comprehensive about it I had to read everything I could find, twice. For those
who do not have this need I
 have annotated the Bibliography a little. I do not
know if the nonsense surrounding the topic is steering many good people away,
but then I tend to assess