you would have expected a decade ago. He would not have hesitated to
accost your driver, but when he saw that you were Wu, he disappeared quickly:
sometimes your mystique had its benefits. On the whole, it was a fine adventure.
As you approached Hou it became increasingly apparent that this was indeed a
new era: the people were happier, more energetic and busier about their tasks,
certain signs, along with less crime, of the renewal of liberties. You were delivered
to the steps of a large, new residence about three li from the palace. This, you
would learn, had been built for you and several of your peers, each of whom had
been sim ilarly chosen and summoned from all parts of this still-small kingdom.
And it had enough room yet for several more apprentices. It did not take long for
you to realize that these men and women were indeed peers: those few whom
you had heard tales about were rumored to be the best diviners in the Shang
kingdom. At forty-eight, your age was about average for the group. You mingled
together with growing enthusiasm, and nervous anticipation: you have been
506

instructed by Royal command to await the arrival of Zhou Gong himself. It was
apparent that the Duke of Zhou had at last been set free of his seven years of
royal duties as regent for his nephew, Lord Cheng, the Sovereign.
The Duke of Zhou was a man who might live forever: you could see this with
no aids to your insight. He planted seeds instead of building towers. The first of
these he planted on his entry . Just inside the courtyard door there was a small
room which he entered to change his clothes from his royal public finery into a
diviner’s robe, while his retainers stood guard outside in the courtyard. He stood
patiently, while you finished bowing, then he bid you be seated and sat among
you. He wasted little time with formalities, but he invested a good part of the
morning in introductions. You were informed that your gathering was both at his
request and by Sovereign Cheng’s royal decree. You were notified that the task
you now had before you would not be completed in your lifetimes. You were
warned that some of you would disagree with the nature of this task and call it
inappropriate. You were asked to stay only as long as you continued to see its
merits and work to add to its value. You would be permitted to leave, and would
be replaced, whenever you chose to, provided that you gave a full and detailed
account of your reasons for doing so. Within these walls, the Duke would be one
of your group and you would be required to speak freely, to the point, from the
heart and with candor.
The mood of this congress of scribes and diviners, wizards and shamanesses,
this Wu Xian , was established at the beginning. It was a time when sweeping
changes in your field might be made, as a natural outgrowth of the new Mandate
of Heaven upholding the new dynasty. You were among both your peers and
your superiors, and in your case this meant the best. It would not be two days
before the last of you became the first to laugh at a moment, and by four days, the
first to criticize an idea. And it would be two and eight months before the first
two of your group would offer their reasons and leave.
Zhou Gong began without words to introduce you to your task. It would be
important that this was demonstrably self-explanatory. He sat beside a large pile
of stalks from the Yarrow plant, some stalks whole and some broken, facing south
and pointing south to indicate the orientation of the room. The Yarrow plant had
been experimented with for some time now as
 a way to divine. A couple of new
techniques had been developed, but none promised to revolutionize anything in
the diviners' world, much less impress the king or his court. He then began to lay
out the diagrams, beginning with the two. He paused long enough to be certain
of the group’s comprehension. Next came the four, which were placed in the Si
Fang, and the Shi Fang , the four directions and the seasons’ dir