t from those he now stands above. With all
the bigger tyrants now gone, the only half-innocent followers and failures at being
effectively guilty are pardoned. This is the worst time for resentment and retribution.
The moment of victory means laws and mandates all change, and so he makes this
sweeping gesture. The past can be changed at will when better things need to begin.
The grateful parade of new citizens will do better rebuilding than a trail of slaves.
237

30, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 29, Kan, Exposure
qian gua (inverse): 30. Li, Arising
jiao gua (reverse): 30, Li, Arising (chong gua 5)
hu gua (nuclear): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
30, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Tipareth in Atziluth
* Tarot: Six of Wands
* Astrology: Sol in Fire
30, Quotations
* Psychological history of the concept ‘subject.’ The body, the thing, the whole
construed by the eye, awaken the distinction between a deed and a doer; the doer,
the cause of the deed, conceived ever more subtly, finally left behind the ‘sub-
ject.’ Our bad habit of taking a mnemonic, an abbreviated formula, to be an entity,
finally as a cause, e.g., saying of lightning ‘it flashes’. Or the little word ‘I.’ To
make a kind of perspective in seeing the cause of seeing: this was what happened
in the invention of the subject, the I. —Nietzsche, Will to Power
* I seem to be a verb. —Buckminster Fuller
* We burn daylight. —Shakespeare, Merry Wives of Windsor
* There is no nature at an instant. —A. N. Whitehead
* Sunshine proves its own existence. —Arabic proverb
* All flesh is grass. (Not intended to be this profound) —Isaiah 40:6
* With Divine light the natural life is no obstacle to the eternal light ... .
knowledge, with the power to apply it, that is the eternal light.
—Meister Eckhart
* I am part of the sun as my eye is part of me. That I am part of the earth my feet
know perfectly, and my blood is part of the sea. There is not any of me that is
alone and absolute except my mind, and we shall find that the mind has no exis-
tence by itself, it is only the glitter of the sun on the surfaces of the water.
—D. H. Lawrence
238

GUA 31, XIAN2, RECIPROCITY
 
  Binary 001 110 = 14; Gen below, Dui above
31.X, Overall Image
Up on the mountain there is a lake
Reciprocity
The noble young one, accordingly, is open to welcome the other
First the stillness, then the joy; first the poise, then the pleasure. What belongs in a
lowlier place finds itself exalted, crags normally harsh and cold are softened in the
clouds and mist, rained on until they flower. A beauty waits and wants to be loved
beside the alpine lake. One cannot be self-satisfied here: the two will complete and
enrich each other. Joy is held up high. The wise will put preoccupation aside, and be
open to joy by their readiness. To put the other first now is the way to meet one’s
own needs as well. For what it is that she needs, the attractive one will bring peace.
Strength yields for this, not to this, humbling itself. The already-full gain nothing.
31.0, Reciprocity
Fulfillment
Rewarding to persist
To court the young woman* is promising
Life grew up with the earth. Ages before these mountains were young, most of the
beings had already learned to team up and pair off. Such an ancient alchemy knew
how to make new life - out of interacting with others. Now some forms of thought
have appeared and they claim to be wiser than this, possessed of a subtler science.
But even these won’t  mistake eros for frivolous force. At least they make it a devil.
Beyond simple union, beyond putting our fractured, fragmented selves back together
as viable, functioning wholes, there might be no other purpose or plan. Every human
being alive has a myriad generations of human and near-human ancestors to thank
for bringing them here, not to mention the primates and far longer lines of descent.
Each of these beings, in turn, had something to give in exchange for something they
wanted. Each self struck a ba