success. The greatest gift you can offer the ancestors is to become
a great one yourself. This isn’t done by giving up too much, certainly not the center.
323

45.M, Key Words
Gather together, assemble, collect, congregate, consolidate, concentrate, convene
Banking, shoring up, saving, pooling, collective strength, convocation, assembly
Safe numbers; reserve, reservoir, contingency fund, sanctuary from insecurities
Trusting, settling doubts; risk readiness, insurance, assurance, caching provisions
Confidence, composure, self-possession, integrity, security, sang froid, aplomb
Pulling it / yourself together; having / holding it together; comportment, dignity
45.G, From the Glossary
cui4 (to) gather, assemble, unite, collect, bring together, pull together, bundle,
cluster, convene, integrate, concentrate (s, ed, ing); (a, the) gathering, assembly,
assemblage, congregation, collection, crowd; security, unification, collectedness,
self-possession, confidence, assurance, composure, reintegration, integrity, con-
centration; bunch, bundle, cluster, multitude of grasses; (to be) thick, close-set,
dense; “pulling it together,” “holding it together,” “having it together”
45.T, Tuan Zhuan
Collectedness
 (Means) to congregate
Acceptance behind satisfaction
The firm (is) central (and) resonant
Hence, congregation
The sovereign approaches his temple:
To convey the filial offering
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being making an offering:
Concentrating with integrity
To offer great sacrifices (is) promising,
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
Agreeing with heaven’s higher order
Study the reason to congregate
Then heaven (and) earth (and) the myriad beings
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
324

45.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.1: standards change, leave the gate to interact)
Being true is not the end of it
If confused, then pull together
As a cry for help
And one helping hand restore good humor
Do not worry
Progress is not an error
45.1x If confused, then pull together:
One’s directions (are) confused
The gathering grows complex and confusing. The little one, true to his nature, first
follows this and then follows that, without a ruling direction, even to go to and fro.
In a growing mess of wrong turns and digressions, he loses all sight of his leader.
The lost and lonely perspectives won’t help him find his way: frustration and panic
are too overwhelming. Then he might reach out to all the wrong strangers. Whether
puppy or monkey or human, lost children are born with the wisdom to call out for a
paw or the hand of someone familiar. Inborn insecurities restrain them each time out
to only a little bit more of the world. Some of the reason to not worry here is that life
has this already partly in hand. Insecurities might serve our needs as often as setting
them aside or putting them behind us. A want of reassurance helps hold us together.
45.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.2: oppressed at feast, red sashes, offer sacrifice)
Drawn to the promising
Not wrong
But sincerity precedes the real reward
when offering the modest spring sacrifice
45.2x (To be) led by the promising is not wrong:
The center has yet to evolve
When we are at our best, feeling strong and mature, we might more often be led by
what we can give or sacrifice than by what we can get or take from the things that are
catching our eyes. The notion of promise might only enter our minds as something
we make, not see. But when we are at our best, we know we are already full, and are
grateful to have our needs met. To offer a great sacrifice is not to look first for what
we are promised. And then to be drawn or led by the promise is something like our
prey being led to our traps by our bait. One following even true heart’s desire won’t
always look where he’s going. Some sort of goal is expected of movement, even  the
moves of pure wisdom. Wits are better collected around something that’s up ahead.
It’s always best to give someth