s just not passing muster. Perhaps the multitude has taken the leadership over.
Perhaps their leaders are so idle-headed that the masses might as well be self-ruled.
Maybe they can all take a vote now on where to go next, or maybe form a committee,  
or decide they all get to ride in the wagons. Foes could stay home and still win a war
of attrition, then show up to fix up the farms and care for the widows and daughters.
The higher grades of advancement are open now, but this means someone to blame.
07.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.4: release your big toe, trust companions)
The militia’s fallback encampment
Not a mistake
07.4x A fallback encampment is not a mistake:
Still not neglecting the principles
This does not look like business as usual. The militia sends out its party of scouts,
who come back pale and trembling, all full of stories and chatter. The foes do not
look like people, their smiles melt stones at a distance, even their dwarves are two
meters tall. The retreat is sounded in whispers. If this were a standing army, with its
standing orders and targets, things might be a lot harder, with no getting free from
last week’s plans and ideas. The militia can disengage and think twice, and be more
afraid to look dead than foolish, and win a truly great victory in simply remaining
alive. Already there is talk of a great new alliance, but first is more talk of remaining
invisible, advancing in other directions, assuming no postures, making no gestures
or taunts. At least some more information is needed and room in which to review it.
98

07.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 29: Kan, Exposure 
(Fan Yao 29.5: pit not flowing over, appreciate level attained) 
The hunt takes captives 
Worthwhile to manage the talking 
Avoid error 
The elder son captains the militia 
The younger son transports fatalities 
Constancy is inauspicious 
 
07.5x The elder son captains the militia: 
According to tempered action 
* The younger son transports fatalities: 
A commission would not be appropriate 
The game is afoot and thus the hunt becomes war games. Wild pigs and birds have 
invaded the field. To put the young son in charge now is to bring on the slaughter,  
but get, in the process, a three-week supply of leather and bacon or poultry and eggs. 
The quicker reaction is noisy and hasty. The wiser response will look at the time and  
big picture. The elder son, as captain, will plan a strategic defense, will manage this  
invasion as though it were a campaign, and summon the swineherds instead of the  
butchers and give the militia a herd and a flock, to manage for the next generations. 
War is often called the Dao of abnormality. It is waged with the unexpected. In the  
predictable are the pitfalls: one arms with the crafty surprises. The young son knows 
no such big bag of tricks. The elder has the repertoire, the commanding information. 
 
07.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience 
(Fan Yao 04.6: smiting the halfwit, defend from transgressions) 
The seasoned noble assumes the mandate, 
Establishes domains and recognizes ruling families 
Lesser people will not be used 
07.6x The seasoned noble assumes the mandate: 
By right (of) merit 
*Lesser people will not be used: 
 (They would) certainly confuse the domain 
The battles are over and won; the weapons and armor are returned to the cache; the  
militia is disbanded, debriefed and sent home. The losses are tallied and not found  
severe and all of the due adjustments made. Reconstruction gets underway, and from  
the sound of things, the newborns will soon outnumber the graves. The prince takes 
back his command from the general’s most capable hands. But in this time while the  
wounds are still fresh and bleeding, the prince and the general will talk. The terrible  
price has been paid, lessons bought dearly with lives and in blood. The two will now 
squeeze all the growth that they can from this cost. Those of proven valor and skill  
will be granted power and land. Those who tried to