here is forward progress
How is this so?
Heaven’s higher law is not protection:
(It is) movement itself!
204

25.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.1: pulling up grass roots, with another cluster)
With no pretense, to go forward is promising
25.1x Without pretense comes to advance:
Attaining the purpose
With no help from mind’s prior knowledge, an inner sense says to keep moving.
A fetus does not know where it’s going when it first kicks the wall of the womb.
It is doing this to learn about legs. Life’s first order of business is living to learn.
Feedforward leads to feedback and this will feed the mind what it needs. Even the
young of cattle and sheep can frolic and play and seem as if they had minds. Life
pushes forward: the glorified mind is only one of its instruments, and has no more
value or worth than the ways life can put it to work. Most confuse such innocence
with ignorance, look upon wildness as a thing best outgrown, but life has had time
to put its science together and knows t hat on average it’s better to explore than to
stay put or hide. The promise here is of learning ahead, not guarantees of success.
25.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao 10.2: treading level, easy path, obscure one persists)
When not plowing to harvest
And not breaking new ground for established fields
Then it is worthwhile to have somewhere to go
25.2x Not plowing to harvest:
No riches yet
It is a folly of thinking to think that life in the present is confinement to life in the
present. From its center here it reaches both forward and back. No garden would
ever come to pass if no kind of forethought were thought, or if no kind of vision was
seen and combined with tips from gardeners past. But the bulk of the work is done
in the middle of these. We do not reap the harvest while plowing, nor do we dine on
the third year’s crop while planting the first year’s seeds. We might trick ourselves
into thinking that back pain or blisters are somehow their own reward. We trick our
children in school, so that reading and math seem relevant many years ahead of time.
These tricks may be better than expectations, which cost us our presence of m ind,
but best is to honor the need and just do it. Nothing passes the time like enjoyment.205

25.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.3: caching weapons, climbing hills, 3 years without)
One without pretense still has misfortunes
Sometimes tying one’s ox
Means the drifter’s gain
And the townsfolk’s disaster
25.3x The drifters’ gaining the ox
(Is) the townsfolk’s disaster
That bad things can happen to good people is the source of much wrong-headed,
paranoid thinking. Accidents happen, and things not deserved. The ox which was
tethered by some innocent farmer is the drifter’s gain, against a great loss of trust.
Wisdom is built using tough knowledge too, and living to learn must also learn this.
Undeserved ill fortune might squat on anyone’s head. To account for its presence,
many of life’s extra meanings were conjured up out of thin air. Professionals will
divine from its droppings, and pretend to know its next stop. But while this thing
squats on the innocent bystander, things far from the truth will be thought, things
not to the point will be said. Thus does the burden of proof fall upon the accuser,
and the accused enjoys a presumption of innocence and the benefit of the doubts.
25.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.4: advise prince to follow, then perform reliably)
May there be loyalty
Not a mistake
25.4x Prescribing loyalty is not a mistake:
Certainly presume this!
Some things must be presumed for the sake of our own mental health. Trust is one
such presumption, and also an unending source of life’s lessons. Mostly we’ll learn
in the end to lower our expectations too far. The fortunate ones expect others to be
on the kind and ethical side of the average, or expect to turn losses to lessons, and
set aside a dumping place for all those di