ow! And what sense to breathe deeply, get bearings and enjoy a great view!
29.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.4: grave approach, oppressed in a gilded chariot)
A jug of wine, a basket of rice or two, and utensils of clay
Handed expediently through the window
Ultimately not a mistake
29.4x A jug of wine (and) a basket of rice (or) two:
Firmness (and) flexibility meet here
On the brink of an important change, the critical thing is to cut through illusion and
nonsense. The crises which crowd the time leave no time for the frivolous ceremony.
Warrior, advisor, doctor and shaman will speak to the chief in urgent terms, devoid
of allusions and protocols. They need their words to sink in right now, like stones,
unbuoyed by etiquette. The knot on the gate is cut, not untied. The slow ones are
knocked aside. Teachers don’t flatter students. Time becomes precious. He who has
just a few moments left is rich with an unclouded mind. We cannot take the passive
approaches: all of those rules slow us down. The petty tyrants are disobeyed now.
Candor and frankness are welcome. The window lets in fresh air with the goodies,
and new opportunities too. Must all of this weight, this ballast and jetsam, return?
230

29.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.5: avoid errors, elder son captains, the younger)
The pit is not flowing over
To appreciate the level attained
Is not a mistake
29.5x The pit is not flowing over:
The middle is not yet complete
His level of fullness is still lacking flow. The waters are still collecting now, still well
below the rim of the pool, and also collecting a bit of scum and debris. A great and
flowing vitality will not be hurried along, although it would help to hasten a future
fulfillment by plugging up a few leaks. Water will have the patience and presence
to fulfill each need in due time and move along once each is done. Meanwhile, his
mean level grows, slowly approaching the rim, his threshold to the beyond. A fool
might exhaust himself here, foaming and frothing, trying to splash himself into the
future, or leaping to hasty conclusions. Maturity is not just in fullness: it recognizes
what is and starts there. Just think that this much time to fill up must mean a great
capacity. Even the muddiest water, down in the smelliest pit, is rain again some day.
29.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 59: Huan, Scattering
(Fan Yao 59.6: dispersing hot-bloodedness, getting distance)
Bound up with braided rope and stranded cord
Put away inside a thicket of thorny brambles
Three years without gains
Unfortunate
29.6x Top six loses the way:
An unfortunate three years
Fresh from the pits, but still down there at heart, he keeps his heart pounding with
wild actions and unruly behavior. Reaching the top of the canyon is only reaching
the surface, not like the summit where hot blood is cooled by brisk winds. He said
he was looking for limits and not just restraints. Private conviction now gets a whole
new meaning, as he sets himself up for a tough test of wits: an impressive escape
to follow this impressive trap he’s got into. He’s surrounded on all six sides now,
while canyons only have two, but still with narrowed horizons and no view over the
the top. Options narrow, space becomes time, a thousand tomorrows to plan and go
over the lessons. The challenge he has set himself to, for the sake of advancing his
purposes, leaves him three years in bewilderment, in which to review his progress.
231

29, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 30, Li, Arising
qian gua (inverse): 29, Kan, Exposure
jiao gua (reverse): 29, Kan, Exposure (chong gua 2)
hu gua (nuclear): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
29, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yesod in Briah
* Tarot: Nine of Cups
* Astrology: Luna in Water
29, Quotations
* Put all your eggs in one basket, and Watch That Basket. —Mark Twain
* You gain strength, courage and confidence by every experience in which you
really stop to look fear in the face. You must do the thin