years no recovery)
At the source of the appetites
Brutal but promising
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
27.6x (At) the source of the appetites (with) a brutal promise:
(There are) well-earned rewards
Like the priest on a mission to cannibal land, he sets himself up to provide, to give
to those who seek in hunger below, knowing, we hope, to not drop his own meaty
self into their gaping jaws. Within his own frame of reference, he might not be so
pretentious at all, and note that his health has him roaming about, wanting to share.
Some tribes across the great water will make no distinction twixt body and soul and
already know flesh is bread and blood wine. Let him first expect to learn as much as
he plans to teach and to keep his wit trained on their hungers. Being fuel for flame
often means getting burned; giving oneself often means being taken or even refused.
The top of the food chain is always food for someone. To give them fish or to make
them dependent leaves him no way home: they will bite that hand, then eat him alive.
219

27, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 28, Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
qian gua (inverse): 27, Yi, Hungry Mouth
jiao gua (reverse): 62, Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
hu gua (nuclear): 02, Kun, Accepting
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 29, 59, 60, 61
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
27, Notes
* 27.1 The tortoise image accompanies several hollow gua shapes, yin surrounded
by yang. See also 41.5 & 42.2, both with Zhi Gua 61.
27, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Assiah of Atziluth
* Tarot: Princess of Wands
* Astrology: Caput Draconis in Fire
27, Quotations
* To a man with an empty stomach, food is God. —Gandhi
* A hungry man is not a free man. —Spanish proverb
* Grub first, then ethics. —Bertold Brecht
* We of the Tleilaxu believe that in all the universe there is only the insatiable
appetite of matter, that energy is the only true solid. And energy learns. Hear me
well, Princess, energy learns. This, we call power.
—Frank Herbert, Dune Messiah
* I saw them eating and I knew who they were. —Kahlil Gibran
* The soul, like the body, lives by what it feeds on. —J.G. Holland
* Understanding human needs is half the job of meeting them.
—Adlai E. Stevenson
* We do not know what we want and yet we are responsible for what we are -
that is the fact. —Jean-Paul Sartre
* We don't know what we want, but we’re ready to bite somebody to get it.
—Will Rogers
* Our minds are like our stomachs; they are whetted by the change of their food,
and variety  supplies both with fresh appetites. —Quintilian
220

GUA 28, DA4 GUO4, GREATNESS IN EXCESS
 
  Binary 011 110 = 30; Xun below, Dui above
28.X, Overall Image
The lake rises over the trees
Greatness in excess
The noble young one, accordingly, stands alone and undaunted
And steps back from the world without sorrow
Rain dancers call down heaven itself. Now the sky has a weight few prepared for.
Orchards and structures under the lake, cries become bubbles below: this is more
than a little over the top. The great passes through, the local world is almost gone.
This is not wrath or fury, not divine justice or plan, only a thoughtless, ham-handed
fist of a world much bigger than us, far too great to care for the parts of the whole.
Here is an adventure to which one will not need to travel. There’s just time to collect
a few wits, to step up and get nimbly moving, no time for fret or regrets. The losses
won’t be so for long, once the past is washed away. An overwhelming finality helps.
28.0, Greatness in Excess
The ridgepole bends
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Fulfillment
Too much of existence comes to visit one place, so you may be crowded out soon.
Nothing of this will ask you for p atience. The wind with driving rain soaks the old
thatched roof through, the ridgepole flexes under strain. Meetings like this with the
powers that be, or the peaks of the human experience, seem to avoid all the boredom
well enough. But when they crest, expect to relocate quickly and have somewhere
to g