) fineness
* Her place was in the center,
In order to honor the journey
The king’s maiden daughter cannot help but wed a man from a lower station in life.
How easy it would be here to have the perfect wedding and to be the perfect bride,
but at the insistence and with the help of her wise, old father, Lord Yi, a statement is
made instead: she dresses more humbly than good taste allows, more humbly than
her bridesmaids. Even if this is a moment to be remembered forever, why would she
want perfection so soon in her life? The moment the moon gets full it stops waxing
and shortly begins to wane. Thus to take the position of the moon less than full is
to make the sun wait to see her full face. Hereby this princess has left herself room
to blossom and grow throughout life. This lady will age very well: she will find her
rewards in longer-term prospects and in sharing her prime with her grandchildren.
54.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.6: estranged, alone, seeing weird things in suitor)
The bride offers up a basket, with no contents
The groom sacrifices a lamb, with no blood
Not a direction with merit
54.6x Top six has no content
Offering a basket without substance
All the best forms are adhered to, and all the acceptable motions are made, but this
wedding is a sham. Empty baskets, gold-painted daggers and pre-slaughtered lambs:
be certain that someone is making a profit here, but it will not accrue to this couple.
She walks and looks like a bride. He stands and moves like a groom. We wonder,  
and look for content in all of their lovely speeches and vows. Are these statements
fruitless and bloodless as well? The sacred is missing here. Has the impressive cost
of this farce bought any meaning at all? How long can such vain pretense continue?
They do not prepare to endure. Appearance cannot be maintained without substance
behind it. Yes, this is all very modern, the sacrifice civilized, not primitive or messy.
But all this means is that modern must fail as well: we see this in meaningful signs.
381

54, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress
qian gua (inverse): 53, Jian, Gradual Progress
jiao gua (reverse): 17, Sui, Following
hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 46, 18, 11, 26
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
54, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Atziluth of Briah
* Tarot: King of Cups
* Astrology: Cancer Ascending, Cardinal Water
54, Quotations
* Every monster wouldst thou caress. A whiff of warm breath, a little soft tuff on
its paw: - and immediately wert thou ready to love and to lure it. Love is the danger
of the lonesomest one, love to anything, if it only live! Laughable, verily, is my folly
and my modesty in love. —Nietzsche, TSZ #45
* It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say “It lightens.” —Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet
* People in a hurry cannot think, cannot grow, nor can they decay. They are
preserved in a state of perpetual puerility. —Eric Hoffer
* Though we seem grieved at the shortness of life in general, we are wishing
every period of it at an end. —Joseph Addison
* If the whole human race lay in one grave, the epitaph on its headstone might
well be:  “It seemed a good idea at the time.” —Dame Rebecca West
* Self-respect is the fruit of discipline; the sense of dignity grows with the ability
to say no to oneself. —Abraham J. Heschel
* Nine-tenths of wisdom consists in being wise in time. —Theodore Roosevelt
382

GUA 55, FENG1, ABUNDANCE
 
  Binary 101 100 = 44; Li below, Zhen above
55.X, Overall Image
Thunder and lightning, coming as one
Abundance
The noble young one, accordingly,
executes justice and carries out judgment
Thunder and lightning at once means a little too close: a direct hit. Thunder leaps
from the flame and the heat makes immediate movement, be it in or out of control.
The boom brings it all too much to life. The roads of the busy s ociety come alive
from dawn until d