on with merit
32.1x Digging in for continuity has pitfalls:
At the beginning (and) searching for depth
Endurance works best with an optimum pace, set for the distance to travel. This one
can hardly endure the beginning. Wanting to last a long time in a hurry, he makes
a big, first ditch effort. He digs himself in to get stable, and entrenches himself in his
premature notions. He wants this marathon effort to be over soon, and so he sprints,
takes shortcuts and jumps to conclusions. But life is the means, not the end. Death
is the end and why hurry that grave situation? A grave is only a hole in the ground
with one more side than the one he now digs. This is not having somewhere to go.
One who has done this can no longer go anywhere, with no long term or long run.
Have a good idea? Let’s make it a law or a rut! Need to know who you are? There
are pigeonholes and cubbyholes to squeeze into. The skipped steps aren’t progress.
32.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
(Fan Yao 62.2: pass ancestor, chief, meet grandmother, aide)
Regrets pass
32.2x Nine second’s regrets pass:
The ability to continue (is) in the middle
If these regrets are all that is left now of events you think should have made better
memories, is it anywhere near second best to possess them? If such regrets do not
endure then why should they be clung to? Does not the long road ahead suggest in
some small way moving on? Regret is just a signpost. You would not stay stopped
where a sign says to stop. You pause and process the thing, then go forward. What
you learn from regret might continue and allow you to rebuild your life with what
might not pass. This will continue when you do. Duration is not about staying the
same, just the staying the course if this fits your true nature. To win some and lose
some is life. To succeed and make errors is life. To dwell instead on things which
need leaving behind is not living. Living is discontinued until the reliving is over.247

32.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.3: shouldering baggage but riding, inviting robbers)
Lacking continuity in one’s character
Somehow continuing in such unworthiness
What persists is embarrassment
32.3x Lacking continuity in one’s character:
Nowhere to be endured
We study our lives and make up plans for our past, to sort what we are from what
we are not. We seem incli ned to draw lines of connection between all of our most
shining moments, like a great string of luminous pearls. But we tend to leave out
those actual things which may not shine so brightly, as well as our dark spots, our
shadows and secrets and shames. Duration does not have these long interruptions:
it tracks the paths which we travel in fact. It is so very easy to make improvements
on who we think we are and then come to believe that we shine all the time. But this
does not fool our fellows or peers. A via ble theory of who and what you might be
wants to account for all of the facts, including the great gaps of dullness and dark.
Consistency is the ethical substance. The unreliable substance will not be endured.
32.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.4: sovereign makes offerings at Mt. Chi; opportune)
A hunt without game
32.4x Chronically out of one’s context
Where is game (to be) found?
The game has missed its appointment with destiny. He might be the finest archer,
with an unsurpassed aim for his targets, and yet be the poorest hunter if he sees the
game in his mind’s eye but stalks it in empty fields. The hunter must also track and
find. To be a seeker of a truth isn’t enough to hunt wisdom. Truth sometimes must
be made to come true. The appropriate move depends on what needs appropriating.
To be a finder and come home with nourishing meals, look to the real condi tions
and contexts, where threads, traces, tracks and trails leave clues. The ideals will not
leave such tracks, nor do they do much for hunger. Knowledge can go either way
but wisdom is always applied. Knowledge might hunt whe