rs’ intent
with respect to embedded meanings and the intended readership. When Waley
wrote "peasant interpretation texts" I doubt that anyone even bothered to ask:
"What peasants?" So now when we look at layers of vertical ambiguity they may
be easier to admit. But with one caution: the concrete, very specific and very
literal images should not ever be dismissed as inferior to the metaphorical,
psychological and philosophical ones, particularly not in the Chinese culture,
where they have an equal validity. The important thing is that all of the available
breadth and depth is required if the work is going to respond to the variety of
situations needing response.
Survey
There are at present over two hundred studies and translations available in
English. Many have considerable m erit and treat the subject well along specific
lines of interest. Most are rather narrow in their comprehension and shallow in
their understanding. Some present the book as a “new-age” parlor game, or a
simple device used for foretelling the future. The applications of the Yijing go far
beyond this. And even far beyond the original authors' most visionary intentions.
The Yijing is one of those rare books which expands to the breadth and depth 
of
its readers. Most readers, often for good reasons, do not care to invest the many
years of study and practice that it takes to begin to wander these breadths and
sound these depths. Still, a hastily written introduction is no answer.
Much of the history of Yixue (the broad term for general Yijing studies)
has been the story of the wholesale adoption of a particular point of view for a
time, followed by an extreme overreaction as the need for balance reasserts itself.
At present we have another overreaction as the pendulum swings in the direction
of divesting the  Zhouyi  authors of all common sense instead of attributing too
much philosophical sophistication to them. Nobody seems inclined to start with a
balanced approach. I want one of my hypotheses to be that most of the major
schools have one or more pieces of the puzzle, but it will take a true eclectic to
even begin to put the whole puzzle together. There is a better way to say all of
this: See Appendix 1, Lessons for the Scholars: The Blind Men and the Elephant.
9

The fact that a school may be a fad, at least in its extreme form, will not by
itself prevent it from lasting for centuries, or even millenia. Yixue and academia in
general, like Max Planck's science, all advance one funeral at a time. An idea or a
gloss may be utter nonsense, but  because its supporters agree among themselves,
or rather, don't dare disagree, it can continue as a mass folly. It is not my desire or
purpose here to deliver any final pronouncement of failure to any m ethodology
or school - I will leave that to sharper academic minds and to the centuries. I just
want to be one of the kids at the parade who calls out "Hey, why are those men
naked?" If you do not understand this reference, see Appendix 1, Lessons for the
Scholars: The Emperor's New Clothes. It will help you understand these thinkers.
Many authors and students become extremely, often obsessively, involved
in the Yijing as a binary system and spend years in endless examination of the
permutations of binary order, chasing this wily beast into the distant realms of
physics, genetics, psychology and cybernetics. There is in fact a degree to which
these efforts will contribute to an understanding of the Yijing itself, but beyond a
certain (and early) point this obsession is about as useful as counting as high as
you can, into the hundreds of thousands, because you have an intuition that this
sequence is leading to something huge. See Di mensions, for an analysis of the
structural dimensions which are the most useful within the Yixue field.
Most of the material available in English is based upon translations from
the English; and the most frequently used sources for these versions are earlier
works by Legge, Wilhelm and Blofe