advantage, but not in terms of luck or windfall. This character depicts the
knife of the harvest - it is the kind of advantage that you work or train for, the
reward you m erit, the worth you earn. A worthwhile endeavor pays a return on
the investment, it is worth the effort. In fact, this is the general topic of the whole
sentence. You can wish or pray for good fortune, but wishing and prayer are not
the causes of good fortune. As Louis Pasteur put it: Chance favors the prepared
mind. The context will back this up: the characters in the texts where this phrase
occurs are hard at work on their character, or they are advised to be.
Heng and Zhen, on the other hand, are not so si mple and clear - they seem
to want to go in two directions at once. The context critics cannot find enough
examples of Heng outside of the Yi, and so to them it does not really exist yet and
thus it must be replaced with the graphically similar Xiang (as it is written in the
Mawangdui ms.): to prepare an offering or present a sacrifice. At least, as we saw
before with Fu, this is one of Heng's legitimate meanings, and in fact, as Kunst has
pointed out, it is used strictly in this sense in a few places in the Zhouyi. The
graph of Heng also appears in the character Peng, meaning to cook or to prepare
thoroughly, as if for a sacrifice. The other meaning for Heng refers what happens
when this offering is done properly. The presenter is then rewarded for doing the
right thing - he has fulfilled what is asked of him and so is fulfilled, has satisfied
the necessities and so he achieves satisfaction, he has pleased the spirits and so
becomes spirited or pervaded, saturated or infused with spirit. (See Kunst p181-9
for dissenting opinions on Heng & X iang). Similarly, Zhen has the meaning of a
finding, a truth, an answer to a question, a specific divination or determination, or
22

the resolution of a doubt. But it also means to uphold this truth or determination,
to resolve to uphold this solution to the problem, to try or test it, to prove it (in the
original sense of prove). Resolution is a measure of the clarity of light in optics, as
well as a statement about firmness of pur pose. And so Zhen is also glossed as
determination, persistence, resolve or verification. In the combination of t hese
meanings it might refer to something which exists on both sides of a Change, a bit
of continuity, something we can rely on or hang on to.
Heng and Zhen seem to belong to a category of terms called Janus words,
words having two sets of meanings which either come from or point in opposite
directions (e.g. cleave, sanction, oversight). And yet in this subset of Janus words
they are neither ambivalent nor polysemous. The fullest understanding of words
in this subtype seems to require simultaneous comprehension and integration of
both of the extremes. Consequently they are often treated with great respect as
paradoxes or mysteries. A good English example is the word "Fitness" as it was
used by Spencer and adopted by Darwin. People tend to jump to conclusions
here and think: Oh sure, the top of the food chain, the strongest survive, might
makes right, the victor writes the history, but this is far from the center of what
was meant. W hile Spencer was indeed saying that robust health, strength and
reproductive vigor were vital to genetic success, he was also insisting that the
survivor was the organism best fit into its niche in the environment. Fitness also
means mobility, opportunism and adaptability, an ability to change, every bit as
much as an ability to resist change. It is not only the alpha male who spreads the
seed around - it is also the sneaky little gamma who is able to take advantage of
clandestine encounters in the alpha's harem. Besides the Janus words Fu lfillment,
Satisfaction and Success (for Heng) and Determination, Persistence and Resolve
(for Zhen) some other English examples are Awe (terror and wonder), Capacity
(emptiness is capacity, capacity is 
power