nlike the word salad uttered by schizophrenics.
After all of these years of doing social science, it seems that we still have
not learned to question the motives and assumptions that underpin our oh-so-
scientific observations before we go wading into other cultures. I live near the
ruins of the Anasazi civilization, the ancient inhabitants of the North American
southwest. Here, it is commonly known, the natives 
used Kivas, round earthen
structures, all or partially buried, for their religious ceremonies. Often these were
constructed in special places in villages otherwise dominated by rectilinear forms.
But every so often a new site will be excavated where sm aller round structures
outnumber the rectangular. And the local archaeologists are quick to assess this
new site as that of an especially religious tribe. To an architect, the development
of an architectural style is obvious, especially one which would retain earth more
effectively and require less hand excavation. All he would need to assume about
the culture is a little experience digging holes. He would tend to see this situation
the other way around - after spending some time in these new round spaces, the
inhabitants would recognize their aesthetic superiority and begin to insist on the
large round spaces for their most sacred ceremonies.
I have discussed the Biased Sample problem above, and how we have built
up much of our picture from the limited records kept on im perishable materials,
combined with archaeological finds which are largely related to old burial rituals.
These slivers of view available to the outside observer have become, to us, the
center of the ancient Chinese culture. Within the scope of the methods being
34

applied here it is deemed fatally bad science to go to these distant cultures in our
imaginations and try to get a sense of being inside looking out, to get a feel for
the lebenswelt  and the weltanschauung. To have compassion and empathy for
the humanity of these people, to imagine them being our friends, is just out of the
question. And so, just as behavioral psychology wants to give us people who are
incapable of free choice, this kind of anthropology gives us sacrifice-obsessed
primitives who are incapable of the conscious use of simple m etaphors and
analogies to depict the recognizable patterns of activity in the world. While this is
the typical white m an's view of the ignorant savages, it was adopted by the
Chinese modernists as well. If, in the narrowness of our preconceptions, we can
see nothing more in the Zhouyi than a prognostic text to determine questions of
war, sacrifice and dynastic succession, then it will be nearly impossible for us to
see an educational primer for young nobility, and it will be absolutely unthinkable
that there may be humor buried in the text.
As I have said, there is no question that sacrifice was a vital part of the
early Zhou culture. But why jump from here and claim that it was as big a deal as
the modernists have assumed by extrapolating from the Shang sources? Just how
much of divination time was concerned with questions of sacrifice? Wasn't much
of this made routine by now? Is it not the point of centuries of routine to settle
into a pattern so that you can then lose the need to agonize over all of the little
details? I do not mean to suggest that the culture of sacrifice was unimportant - it
justified the whole political structure and held it together. But as a human being I
am going to guess that a lot of other things occupied the majority of the king's
and the nobles' attention. And these would include many of the same activities
and needs which occupy us today. We are no different biologically or sensorially.
The academics in particular may be intelligent and learned, but they are not
as superior as their prancing and strutting suggests. This is cultural centrism and
snobbery, it is Fellowship With Others in the Clan (13.2). They are assuming too
much about the ancient mental world being unrec