tructurally 
resonant partner. The
structures used here were most often the dimensions of Inverse Hexagrams (Qian Gua) and
Opposite Hexagrams (Pang Tong Gua ) elaborated upon later. Some of these are obvious.
Among the many Inverse pairs, look at: 41, Sun, Decreasing and 42, Yi, Increasing; or 51,
Zhen, as motion and 52, Gen, as rest; or 57, Xun, as mental and 58, Dui, as emotional.
Among the Opposite pairs, look at 01, Qian, Creating and 02, Kun, Accepting (this is the
courage to change what I can, along with the serenity to accept the rest); or 11, Tai, as
interactive and 12, Pi as alienated; or 29, Kan, as water and 30, Li, as fire; or 51, Zhen, as
force and 57, Xun, as finesse; or 52, Gen, as satiety and 58, Dui as need. Note here th at, in
the above examples, 51, Zhen; 52, Gen; 57, Xun and 58, Dui were all paired and contrasted
along two different dimensional axes.
The polarities that are exhibited on the face of the hexagram names themselves are by
no means the end of this. The mere presence of a dimension can often assist the
understanding. Take, for example, the Opposite pair of 61, Zhong Fu, The Truth Within and
62, 
Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess. The first concerns how big and important we feel when
we are contained inside of ourselves, the second concerns how small and insignificant we
feel when we are alone in the outer world. This calls to mind a dichotomy in a Leonard
Cohen song: “We are so small between the stars, so large against the sky ... .” The
juxtaposition and contraposition of ideas is important throughout the Yijing, but this has a
higher order and purpose too: in the internal resolution of paradox as a path to wisdom.
11

The Gua Bian or Hexagram Changes
The ability of one Diagram to change into another according to operational rules was a
part of the original Zhouyi conception. But it is difficult to say with any certainty how many
of these rules existed from the beginning. The Zhouyi, as it has come down to us through an
editing process in the early Zhou dynasty, contains no introduction or instructions and
appears to have had most of its set of original structural elements deliberately obscured or
omitted. There is not even much hard evidence left that the Trigrams antedated or coevolved
with the Hexagrams. Systems elaborated later demonstrate change by way of: 1) Evolution
or derivation (yao into xiang into Ba Gua into Gua, or one into two into three into six line
figures); 2) Combination (e.g. two Ba Gua make up a Gua); 3) Sequence (e.g. gua x u,
discussed later); 4) Cycle (e.g. qua q i, omitted here); 5) Substitution (e.g. ba gong ,
discussed later); 6) Transposition (e.g. jiao gua, discussed later); 7) Permutation (e.g. shi er
di zhi, discussed later); and 8) Interpolation (this section). According to Fendos, among the
many systems of hexagram changes developed in the Western Han were those by Cai
Jingjun (140-90), Men Xi (90-40), and Jing Fang (77-37). Cai’s system passed to Yu Fan
(164-233) in the Eastern Han. Jiao Yanshou (fl. 70-10), in the surviving work Jiaoshi Yi lin,
appears to have been the earliest [Yijing] scholar to apply the principle of Liushi si gua bian
or one hexagram changing into all 63 other hexagrams (Fendos p. 346). This last system
contains the full range of single-response Hexagram possibilities which we have today,
wherein any number from zero to six lines may change into their opposites (making 212 or
4096 possibilities). This is called the Yilin or Forest of Changes, and it is still available.
At an absolute minimum, the Zhouyi has always contained a 448-possibility system,
wherein either nothing at all changes (64 cases) or only one line changes (384 cases). The
former is described by the Gua Ci texts, the latter by the Yao Ci texts. The interpretation of
the extra Yao Ci at 01.7 and 02.7 as meaning “if all six lines change” is conjecture. The
theory that the Yao C i  represents an interpolation in meaning between the Original
Hexagram (known as the Ben or Root Gua) a