w bypassing
It seems like he stands in line for half the morning, mooing and bleating with all of
the others. His one great ambition today was to spend some high quality time with
the spirit tablets left by his ancestors. But he cannot get past grandmother’s diaries.
Now he waits in a new line, to reach somebody in charge. But he can’t make it past
the third minister. This will not do, he explains, and he even tries reasoning. I cannot
allow this, he’s told, and no, you may not go around me, passing me by is against all
my rules. Now if he can settle for less, he can still salvage part of the day, and have
some success in his minor concerns. To be content with less is not always a failure
and small successes do add up. But lack of humility here, not even suited to greater
concerns, is an error of excess and asking for trouble all out of proportion to scale.
427

62.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.3: wide-eyed readiness regrettable, the slow regret)
One is never beyond defending oneself
From behind someone might attack here
Unlucky
62.3x From behind someone might attack here:
Bad luck (only) seems responsible
So far he succeeds in every least thing and small detail. It seems as if nothing can
stop him. Even those creatures smaller than he is enjoy their own small successes.
He is ready to move beyond caution and fear, beyond the small, petty things. With
confidence raised, he turns his back on the weak little threats, forgetting somehow
that weak little threats do most of their dirtiest work from behind. Vigilance looks
forward in time, but in space it means all directions. It is good that he looks ahead,
to get an idea of where he is going, but turning his back and resting assured is not.
Not even the heedful are guaranteed further existence, only that odds will improve.
Some are indeed out to get him: there is a food chain here, full of useful predators.
He now wants the eyes of a predator’s prey, to watch his own back and loose ends.
62.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.4: nothing not worthwhile with candid authenticity)
Make no mistakes
Do not be beyond greeting others in passing
Difficult progress demands heedfulness
Do not rely on unrelenting persistence
62.4x Do not be beyond greeting others (in passing):
The position is not appropriate
* Difficult progress demands heedfulness:
In the end there is nothing friendly to longevity
The earth seems far too prolific these days. It taxes the senses to take in all of those
details. Even the mammals are swarming, and predators run in large packs. On the
road to the market, anonymous throngs sweep past like a great river. The slow and
the gifted, the depraved and the sane, all mix up well in the crowds. The wise must
engage their wisdom, encountering something of each one in passing, catching the
eyes and expressions, quick to underrate nothing. We would like our perceptions
sketched in broad strokes, and human minds seem perfectly suited to this, judging
quickly according to prejudice, using presumptions and profiles, the most data in the
least time. To look all of this over, but overlook nothing, is out of our reach. Those
who do the best become ancestors: they were ready to meet either patrons or thieves.
428

62.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.5: moved in neck & shoulders, avoiding regrets)
Thick clouds but no rain
From our western horizon
Even the prince hunts with tethered arrows
Preferring that quarry inside the cave
62.5x Thick clouds instead of rain:
(It is) finished up above
Dense, lazy clouds from the west collect overhead, and below the hopes rise in the
small, thirsty creatures. But the clouds just co ntinue their easterly drift, as though
indolence stole all their thunder, and complacency put them to sleep. Too aloof to
crash against mountains, even the weather cannot manage greatness this gray day.
The victims wander about, claiming their special privileges. Lotus eaters continue
developing no art. No champions,