asses,
or as be mutton for a greater hunger. It might be best to starve the bad hungers now
and then learn to hunger first for things needed, and then for things wanted and last
for things he’s told he should want - even if the economy is hungry for his needs.
217

27.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.3: so elegant, as if to drip, enduring persistence)
Dismissing the appetites
Persistence has pitfalls
For ten years not to be functional
Is not a direction with merit
27.3x (For) ten years not to be functional:
A path greatly sideways
His tastes want to run towards something a bit more exotic, such as maybe to go
beyond food to live on water and light, like special, holy water and moonbeam light.
How glamorous that would be, how elegant and ethereal. Malnutrition of the spirit
begins in the body forgotten. To fast several days can be a great thing. But we don’t
mistake our belly’s growling for some totem animal power, or the lightness in our
heads for the light of understanding. We cannot thrive by feeding mind nothing but
thoughts about spirit. The mind will starve, or it develops without basic parts. Great
spirit, like that of swift horses, runs throughout the being. Spit out this mouthful of
crazy ideas, don’t swallow that: light hides in food. Go with your gut, but use your
head too. Fad and fashion diets are not for real people. They are not fueling anyone.
27.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.4: biting on dry, bony meat, get funding, arrows)
Top-heavy appetite is promising
The tiger searches, staring and glaring
With its passion to hunt and give chase
Not wrong
27.4x Top-heavy appetite holds promise:
Ascending extends (what is) known
He goes to great lengths, and heights, as a hunter, commanding the broadest views.
Power being the rate at which energy is transformed, a higher power will mean that
much will be transformed. Each and every one of those furry, little creatures would
love to be the tiger’s happy, woodland friend. It isn’t the tiger’s fault they are on the
menu instead. He has no choice but to follow his nature. Back in the good old days,
he would hunt for a weak and stupid human, and back then we were all well-served
by his natural menu selection. He was always objective about this - he could not rely
on pet food and the rare volunteers. He won’t be given snacks or treats for being so
cute. Humanity shares the predator nature. Some make apologies, some give thanks,
but the best is to live the best life, to honor the meal, not waste it in futile existence.
218

27.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.5: be true, kind, no question, kindness is worth)
Dismissing the customary
To abide in persistence is promising
But not suited to crossing great streams
27.5x To abide in persistence holds promise:
Accepting in order to follow the superior
Behind another’s successful example, he experiments with diet, trying out new ways  
of doing the familiar. For a time life will be out of balance. It is not a time to witness
things fairly, or to go fast forward with health, especially not across the great water.
He forages in new fields where the taste is confusing, searches for missing nutrients,
each one of which praises itself as the basic substance of life. The body with life at
stake wants patience and time to decide and needs to work out new ways to appraise
the wants and their satisfactions. First is the necessary, then the sufficient, then the
higher wants.  The structure will be reconfigured once the basis has changed. There
will be subtle signs to look out for. To study this well means reducing the variables
by keeping things simple. It is not a time to make promises or to feed expectations.
27.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.6: lost return, major defeat, ten years no recovery)
At the source of the appetites
Brutal but promising
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
27.6x (At) the source of the appetites (with) a brutal promise:
(There are) well-earned rewa