hem vastly. Before they were just a flock
of birds, but now they have gone beyond, become one with that grandest mystery.
Even the goose gets to heaven.* The humans stuck on the ground, watching these
geese going south, are not to be disconcerted. The feather that comes drifting down
is no minor omen or charm. It has a special place in the rites, as a central prop for
the sacred dance. It honors and captures the spir it of patient transcendence. None
will laugh at their funny feet now: it’s the humans who face the long winter. If the
people can be wise, they’ll be lifted up by example. Liberation is a lifetime of work.
375

53, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
qian gua (inverse): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
jiao gua (reverse): 16, Gu, Detoxifying
hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 45, 12, 17, 25
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
53, Notes
* 53.1, 2 These provide some good e xamples of an Old Chinese word’s wonder-
ful adaptability in and to context. The word zi means any young one, so given the
wild goose as a subject, the legitimate translation is fledgling. If they were not
flying, the word could also be gosling. The reiteration of kan in 53.2, perhaps a nod
to the zhi gua being a chong gua, implies echoes of celebration, or a back-and-forth
interchange. Again, given geese as a subject, honking is the legitimate rendering. The
Chinese word used here for goose (or swan) is the onomatopoeic hong. But if these
were birds of a different feather, squawking, crowing or chirping might have been
legitimately used.
* 53.6 See the Buddhist’s Heart Sutra’s line: gate gate paragate par asamgate
bodhi svaha . Gone, gone, gone beyond, completely gone beyond: waking up:
hooray!
53, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yetzirah of Atziluth
* Tarot: Prince of Pentacles
* Astrology: Taurus Ascending, Fixed Earth
53, Quotations
* “Begin at the beginning,” the king said gravely, “and go on till you come to the
end: then stop.” —Lewis Carroll, Alice
* Free, dost thou call thyself?  Thy ruling thought would I hear of, and not that
thou hast escaped a yoke ... . Many a one hath cast away his final worth when he
cast away his servitude ... . Free from what?  Free for what?”
—Nietzsche, TSZ #17
* Patience, n. A minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue.
—Ambrose Bierce, The Devil’s Dictionary
* Even after a bad harvest there must be sowing. —Seneca
* One of the sources of pride in being a human is the ability to bear present
frustrations in the interests of longer purposes. —Helen Merrell Lynd
* We think in generalities but we live in detail. —A.N. Whitehead
* In most things success depends on knowing how long it takes to succeed.
—Charles Louis de Montesquieu
376

GUA 54, GUI1 MEI4, LITTLE SISTER’S MARRIAGE
 
  Binary 110 100 = 52; Dui below, Zhen above
54.X, Overall Image
Over the pond there is thunder
Little sister’s marriage
The noble young one uses enduring ends
to understand the ephemeral
The pond is aroused by the thunder, her surface all ripples and splash, but soon the
thunder is gone. This nubile, young daughter is a shimmering wave of delight, but
movement  comes from desire alone. Seducing superior males is the only thing on
her mind. This is of no real consequence. A wise one might still enjoy some timely
adventure and mischief, yet he’ll consider beginnings in the light of enduring ends.
He makes his choices with values, and the cure for his having too many good ideas
is a higher standard of good. Haste has no depth or duration. Short sight will trade
rights for privileges, liberty for security, the long-term for the short-term prosperity.
54.0, Little Sister’s Marriage
To go boldly has pitfalls
Not a direction with merit
It might have been simple, a hundred millenia past, to leap with one’s whole heart
at the first opportunity, without any pretense or pretexts. Humans began in this way.
Were it not for the animal passions, only plants would exist. Heaven