k
for bringing them here, not to mention the primates and far longer lines of descent.
Each of these beings, in turn, had something to give in exchange for something they
wanted. Each self struck a bargain with other, to negotiate a new pairing while acting
in what they hoped was their own best interest. Each had to take a lover. Life learned
long ago that the self by itself is extinguished. It learned to want and desire, and that
it would need to merit its rewards and fulfillments. This is what brings out our best.
239

31.M, Key Words
Mutuality, symbiosis, interactions, convergence, coalition, congress, in concert
Sharing, embrace, affinity; persuasion, influence, incentives, interest, affection
Complements, healthy combinations, right for each other, compelling fulfillment
Congress for mutual purposes, teamwork; coming together, resonating with others
Eros, attraction, sensuality, stimulation, prompting, arousal, stirrings, response
Common interests, meeting each other’s needs, valence bonding, synergy, dyad
31.G, From the Glossary
xian2 (to be) joined, conjoined, united (in, with), in touch with; moved, touched,
persuaded (in, by); together, altogether, all, every, mutual, shared, concordant,
convergent, integrated, complete, full, finished; everywhere; (to) feel, sense; join,
conjoin, unite, put together, reciprocate, touch, come into contact, move, embrace,
share, come together, convene, converge, complete (s, ed, ing) (in, with, toget-
her); (a, the) feeling, sensation (s); persuasion, reciprocity, mutuality; entirely,
fully, completely, wholly; (also used for gan, 3232, to stimulate, influence, at-
tract)
31.T, Tuan Zhuan
Reciprocity
(Means) being moved
The flexible (is) above while the firm (is) below
The two vital forces (are) moved in resonance
 (And) with this support each other
Stillness and enjoyment
The masculine submits to the feminine
And so it is that fulfillment rewards persistence
(And) to court the young woman (is) promising
Heaven (and) earth move each other
And so the myriad beings transform (and) come to life
The wise ones move the human heart
And all under heaven respond with peace
Comprehend this function of touch
Then heaven (and) earth (and) the myriad beings
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
240

31.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.1: wrapped with golden rawhide)
Persuaded in one’s big toe
31.1x Persuaded in one’s big toe:
The destination lies elsewhere
He gets itchy feet at the first thought of stimulus. He imagines s ensations to come
and his toes start to curl in early delight. The idea is very compelling. If only there
were no rules. If his toes were hooves he would not be so timid and hesitant. Alas,
he is human, encumbered instead with a soul to keep clean, and humans rehearse
all their pleasures and joys. At least his will has shown the first signs of movement,
and his thought has support from his flesh. These might be good, first vital signs,
if you don’t count the look in those wild, desperate eyes. These do not send clear
signals. And to travel a distance by curling the toes will give such inadequate chase
to the playmate who skips on ahead. The question is when to let go, to let attractive
force take you. Dare I? Should I? Can I? No, you cannot, if you tie yourself down.
31.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness In Excess
(Fan Yao 28.2: older gentleman finds himself a maiden to marry)
Persuaded in one’s legs
Disappointing
To abide is timely
31.2x Even though disappointing, to abide (is) timely:
Acceptance does no harm
He has waited long enough. His legs spring into action, forward and back, without
a great plan; he must get some of this right away and some of that for later. He lets
himself be moved, but only gets carried away, pacing the floor, or bouncing his feet,
or walking it off in his sleep. Yes, the force is extraordinary, but it’s only on general
alert. A direction only shows itself in wear and tear on the rug. The force behind this
movement