what is in
their hearts, somewhere under those fears. They orbit around these needs, the silence
and stillness a great, gaping hole in each of their beings, with no idea that such an
empty place is a reservoir of strength. This is the room we have made for each other.
122

11.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.5: waiting at wine and food, persistence promising)
Lord Yi’s gift of his maiden daughter in marriage
Showed the way to happiness and supreme good fortune*
11.5x (Showing) the way to happiness (and) supreme good fortune:
In the center (is) the way to bring about the promise
When the Sovereign Yi gave his daughter in marriage, the lady could only outrank
her new husband. But a royal decree made them equals. She really had little choice
to marry sideways or up. So what could have been the down side here? To be unable
to hold her old glamour and glory over her new partner’s head? Anyone given some
memory can live in the past. Some might live entirely backwards, backing up into the
future, watching behind for new stuff, not taking a single stride forward, wondering
why they don’t know where they are going. Back-to-back is a painful and difficult
way  to share intercourse. Forbidding the perfect wedding, with all of that pomp and
glory, reduced them to two human beings accepting and loving their limits, seeing
eye to eye. We could all show a little more modesty in the face of what we could be.
11.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.6: What is heaven’s thoroughfare? Fulfillment)
The city wall falls back into the moat
Do not advance the military
From within one’s own district, explain the orders
To persist is disgraceful
11.6x The city wall falls back into the moat:
One’s own orders (are) confused
Fortifying the town with two great lines of defense, they built a great wall from the
stones they had gathered while digging the moat. But today this wall falls apart, and
it falls back into the moat, right in the middle of big plans to send the host marching
out to new conquests and distant frontiers. Here is an ominous omen indeed. What
can this tell them about their home town? When upholding one thing, by negating
or denying another, synergy is reversed. The whole is rendered less than its parts.
Two no’s do not make a yes, as the theory promised they might, but solve into zero
or chaos. Who will think to attack these ruins? Can they open up and wage peace?
Can peace now be seen as more than the absence of war, or safety from an attack?
The wall did not create strength. Can they rebuild with the stones from this lesson?
123

11, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 12, Pi, Separating
qian gua (inverse): 12, Pi, Separating
jiao gua (reverse): 12, Pi, Separating
hu gua (nuclear): 54, Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 1st Moon (Feb)
11, Notes
* 11.1 Note ‘To expedite’ (zheng) in 11.1, “Persistence” (zhen) in 12.1.
* 11.5 When Di Yi (second to last emperor of the Shang dynasty) gave the bride
away to a less powerful and wealthy Zhou noble, she “dressed down” in acceptance
of her humbler station, leaving, as is implied both here and at Gua 54.5, much
room for personal growth. More of the story is told at 54.5.
11, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chokmah in Assiah
* Tarot: Two of Pentacles
* Astrology: Uranus in Earth
11, Quotations
* Allah is great, no doubt, and Juxtaposition his prophet. —Arthur H. Clough
* All the parts of the world are lovers, and every part of the universe is drunk with
encounter. —Rumi
* when the oak begs permission of the birch
to make an acorn - valleys accuse their
mountains of having altitude - and March
denounces April as a saboteur
then we’ll believe that incredible
unanimal mankind (and not until) —e.e. cummings, XIAPE
* People do not understand that that which is at variance with itself agrees with
itself. There is a harmony in the bending back, as in the cases of the bow and the
lyre. —Heraclitus, fr. 117
* I am your tongue, your