ing (is) wrong:
The aims (are) carried out
He belongs to the smallest group possible, as alone as he might ever be. Repelled to
the edge of this strange situation, he works his way further outward. As some of the
dust and smoke clears away he notes that another is fleeing as well. Here now are
your two or more gathered, two lonely souls haunting the margin, on a newly found
common ground. Call this alliance, coalition, support group or church, one equally
lonely friend can turn the whole thing around. The periphery of madness becomes
the vanguard of sanity, a perilous position becomes an exciting frontier, the two odd
ones out can get even. Results such as this can redeem the original problem. Unity
in diversity is the making of common cause on the higher levels of being. Cohesion
and convergence might not be the general rule, but we’ll take it when we can get it.
284

38.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua* 10: Lu, Respectful Conduct
(Fan Yao* 10.5: decisive steps, persistence is stressful)
Regrets pass
Their kind* eats tender flesh
In continuing on, where is the harm?
38.5x Their kind eats tender flesh:
Moving on will have (its) rewards
The tiger is surely enough unlike you to accomplish some of the things you cannot.
And you don’t need more sets of skills that are just like your own. This one would
make a great ally, or an enemy for your enemy. But unless you are able to find or
make common cause, you might want to give him wide margins, to allow for your
errors, such as looking so much like his food. He has not been a kindred spirit for
many millions of years, although he did help your ancestors when they needed to
learn to run faster. Divergence is not a diversion to mess with. You might even try
to relate from somewhere way over there, closer to the familiar, and to beings who
speak in more similar tongues. And yet your basic idea is good: diversity is most
useful, not a problem to solve. And only from self can other be loved or respected.
38.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.6: empty basket, bloodless sacrifice, meritless)
Estranged and alone
Watching a hog, covered with muck
Once a wagon transporting demons
At first stringing that bow
But later unstringing the bow
It is not an adversary but a marital suitor
In going, greet the rain
After this, all is well
38.6x Greeting the rain holds promise:
A multitude (of) doubts disappear
In such a perfect sympathy with this spirit of alienation, he watches this poorly-lit
road on a dark and drizzling day. But as clouds grow darker they also get closer to
getting rid of their rain. Things grow exceedingly spooky and the visions grow more
bizarre. The tension builds to a palpable state, not just in the string of his longbow.
The known and the familiar will set the mind at ease, while the unknown and strange
wake us up. Oddness, newness and stress rouse us into creative perceptions, so that
we might imagine the worst and so avoid it. The weirdness on parade here is like the
darkness of the clouds: when the mood grows too thick it will dump. Drizzling rain
becomes genial, cleansing rain; even the mud is delightful. This ought to be a relief.
To see devils in a fiancé this soon is too much: this is supposed to stay a surprise.
285

38, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 39, Jian, Impasse
qian gua (inverse): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members
jiao gua (reverse): 49, Ge, Seasonal Change
hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 48, 57, 05. 09
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
38, Notes
* 38.5 This is a zhi Gua and fan yao  reference to hu, the tiger in Gua 10. If ever a
stranger’s uniqueness and individuality commanded respect ....
38, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Netzach in Atziluth
* Tarot: Seven of Wands
* Astrology: Venus in Fire
38, Quotations
* Thank Allah, for in his wisdom he put death at the end of life and not at its
beginning. —Arabic proverb
* Resist much, obey little. —Walt Whitman
* ... who wield a poem huger than the grave
from wh