surely be said: this was only a phase
that some of this world went through, although sometimes again and again. When
nearly the same things happen again and again, then and there we find our reasons
to hope. Seven days out of line? No matter, never mind, to and fro will go the way,
here we go and come again, right back to where we belong. And this does not mean
we must live there all of the time, any more than needing to sleep means sleeping all
of the time. But is this not a high, holy thing to spend some time where we belong?
197

24.M, Key Words
Coming back, coming home, coming around, beginning anew; to resume, retrace
Re-; Restoration, restitution, redintegration, renewal, reunion, recovery, resilience
Natural processes, cycles, the inevitability of cycles, recycling; renewed promise
Pivotal point, still point, turning point, axis of the world, winter solstice, rebirth
Core truths surviving digression, reconstitution, rededicated efforts, revitalization
More coming around than turning back, 361 degrees instead of 180 degrees (Fan)
24.G, From the Glossary
fu4 (to) devolve, recover, recur, redo, renew, recommence, recall, repay, reply,
repeat, restore, resume, retrace, return, revert, revise, revive, (come, go, turn)
around, back, home (to); fall back (on); overturn, turn over (s, ed, ing); (a, the)
answer, recovery, recurrence, renewal, reply, response, return; (to be) in answer,
reply, response, return (to); recurring, recurrent; again, repeatedly; coming and
going
24.T, Tuan Zhuan
Returning (means) fulfillment:
The firm comes back around
Energetic, and using acceptance to proceed
So it is that exiting (and) entering (are) without anxiety
(And) companions arrive without fail
Turning around (and) returning (is) the way,
The seventh day brings return:
(As) heaven behaves
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
Firmness prevails
(In) returning one sees the heart of heaven (and) earth!
198

24.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.1: walking on frost, hardened ice is the outcome)
Not far to return
Nothing worthy of regret
Most promising
24.1x Nothing distant in this return:
The way to refine (a) life
Even the greatest or truest of paths must be thought to include some of these smaller
digressions and trips aside. Being oneself is being true to one’s nature, and nobody
experiments quite like nature. Life is for learning. The straight and narrow directions
are heedless of most of this world. The most respectable man in the world should be
permitted, if it is his choice, to enjoy women’s toes a little too much. It’s these little
flaws in the art of our lives that let evil spirits out. Life needs to explore its options
and this can’t always be done only inside of the mind. Stepping off the side of the
path to have a good look around, or simply to relieve yourself, is not a great mistake.
The shortest distance between two points is the distance traveled in fact: it isn’t the
one in the plan. The guilt of one who fears to stray will make of his path a deep rut.
24.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.2: united in commitment, promising in every way)
Content to return
Promising
24.2x Contentment in return holds promise:
Through lowly compassion
He goes out a little bit further this time, coming home seven days later, back to the
fold, and maybe a fatted calf, with something new to ponder, a little wiser, a bit more
humble. Exposure to the new lets him bring some of this home, to share with family
and friends, to compare it with what is thought right, here on this side of the stream.
Going as scout and diplomat for friends and the tribe he returns to will mean that he
belongs here still. And this part is important: the decision made to do this exploring
for those you leave at home can be made backwards in time, especially if one is able
to turn error around into wisdom. When measuring a direction from self, instead of
from a path, all straying is done in forward directions, not sideways. Turning around
to go ba