d hair, fool, and your raiment of goatskins. Within you
is ravening and the outside you make clean. —Buddha, The Dhammapada
* What kind of truth is this which is true on one side of the mountain and false
on the other? —Michel de Montaigne
* Every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the limits of the world.
—Schopenhauer
* For the great majority of mankind are satisfied with appearances, as though they
were realities and are more often influenced by the things that seem than by those
that are. —Machiavelli
* Half the work that is done in this world is to make things appear what they are
not. —E. R. Beadle
* It’s a small world - but I’d hate to paint it. —Steven Wright
* It is helpful to know the proper way to behave, so one can decide whether or not
to be proper. —Gail Carson Levine
* The trouble ain't that people are ignorant. It's that they know so much that ain't
so. —Josh Billings
*  A man knows that his work is well-done when it has a beauty of form to it. But
he does not add or leave out anything of substance just to make his work appear
more beautiful. —Eyler Robert Coates, Sr.
190

GUA 23, BO1, DECOMPOSING
 
  Binary 000 001 = 01; Kun below, Gen above
23.X, Overall Image
The mountain depends on the earth
Decomposing
Superiors, accordingly, are generous to subordinates
Confirming their positions
The mountain towers over the earth. A mighty pile of stones indeed, but no threat
to time’s dominion. Compelled by long ages of erosion and gravity, its impressive
stature is slowly surrendered for the sake of a broader base. Thus the wise will learn
to minimize what they hoard, and to give generously to common and regular people
who support them from below. Piles of wealth become talus and scree, or charity.
Redistribution will happen, but this can be voluntary and sent to where it does the
most good. Only a few can dwell at the top, but the least oppressive can stay there
the longest. As life does with its seed, the best wealth to carry also weighs the least.
23.0, Decomposing
Not worthwhile to have somewhere to go
Simply by definition, any endeavor  or thing which isn’t sustainable must some day
cease to occur or exist. These things will tend to take care of themselves, with a little
assist from gravity. Time in unknown quantities will even take care of social reform.
To move in enduring ways, then, means allowing the heavy to fall, the old to die, the
weak to be eaten and the low to fill up. To move with the time is to move along with
least effort. Suppose you have an enemy with self-destructive behavior. Would you
give him a reason to rally and fight for his life? It will not end at decay: when husks
go seeds takes a turn. Lasting perfection is not more important to nature than death
and rottenness are. Seeds do not sprout out of nice-looking fruit. So to not give up
will mean giving downwards. In his tower high on the hill, the uppity one will try to
sleep smugly, up on his bed of complacency. Had he passed a few of his excesses
downward, the mob would not now be coming to get him, seeking to lay him low,
hoping to catch this useless encumbrance napping. But it’s only a bad situation for
things as they are; it is good for things as they will be. Try going in that direction.
191

23.M, Key Words
Curtail, abridge, cut back, trim excess, pare do wn, deprive, skin, strip, flay, ruin
Ground, downgrade, stabilize, consolidate, broaden base, return to basics, reduce
Deterioration, breakdown, overthrow, destabilization, deconstruction, insecurity
Overripeness, dross rotting around a seed, nourishment from decay, germination
Germaneness, essentials; pruning; concessions for sustainability, wide foundation
Leaving what should be left, carrying on with less but with stability; lightening up
23.G, From the Glossary
bo1 (to) curtail, (pare, cut, break) d own, abridge, strip away, split, lay bare, ex-
propriate, reduce, cut up, skin, peel, flay, deprive, ruin, break, pluck, degrade,
scavenge, loot (s, ed, ing); (to be) d