eball's
black (rods) and red, green and blue (cones). But six, not five, is the next most
logical division. Attempts to assign colors to the Wu Xing  or Five Agents had to
omit the color of 
the sky. With sound, the spectrum “divides itself” into specific
ranges by laws of physics, at the doublings of vibration frequencies in physical
objects such as taut strings. The further divisions within these ranges may seem
more arbitrary. That these ranges are called octaves reflects only one of these: the
pentatonic and the chromatic scales are two of many other options. But it is a
resonance within our own aesthetic sensitivities, and thus an accord with the
neural substratum and physical structures of these senses, which gives a particular
scale longevity in our cultures and languages.
Scales which survive do so when they both cover a spectrum well enough
to describe a full class or category of experience and resonate well enough within
our beings that we may use them to communicate these experiences and so create
mutual understanding. Seeing scales in terms of their longevity in human culture
may tend to prejudice us against the newer but ultimately viable ones, but the
uphill struggle to acceptance may also be seen as a good thing, as it is in science.
The human mind, particularly when it is seeking the security of belief, can extract
significance from nearly any white noise or set of random events. Many of t hese
can survive for quite a while though, as with the belief that there is meaning in the
random assignment of decimal calendar dates to our days (numerology), or in the
random sequencing of the letters of the various alphabets (gematria). A
 criterion to
judge the practical worth of this significance, such as its utility or effectiveness in
444

communication, should be part of our mental apparatus here. The gods of ancient
Greece, who each had their well-defined dominions over the various aspects of
human existence, survived not because they were immortal, but because of the
unusual clarity of this domain definition and its resonance with the mortals who
kept them alive. The rel evant spectrum here was the broader range of human
experience. The discipline of ps ychology attempts to accomplish a similar scaling
with its terminologies, to cover the ranges of human behaviors, em otions, defense
mechanisms, intelligences and so forth. But in its pretensions about being the
science of behavior, psychology often forgets that it, too, is behavior, and perhaps
ultimately, a languaging behavior, not so unlike the development of the Yijing.
The Yijing, like its counterparts in the west, is founded upon a handful of
these time-tested scales and upon their resonance in the human psyche. The
fourteen sm aller diagrams, which both coexist with and constitute the Yijing ’s
sixty-four Hexagrams or Ba Gua, are rooted in the three S cales of Two, Four and
Eight. Before charting the scope of the meanings of these fourteen, a short
discussion of these scales is in order; of other scales which are buried more deeply
in the body of Yi lore; and of a few of the many scales which were left out.
The Scale of One, or the pantheistic Unity of the mystics, received its fullest
development later, in the Song dynasty, in the Yijing-based, metaphysical
speculations of Shao Yong, Zhou Dunyi, Cheng Yi and Zhu Xi. Like the Qab alists,
with their En, No-thing, En Sof, The Limitless, and En Sof Or,  The Limitless Light,
they used three names: Wu, No-thing, Wu J i, The Ultimate No-thing, and Tai J i,
The Supreme Ultimate. The third of these, which back in the Han was called Tai Yi,
The Supreme Unity, was expressed in the fa
miliar Taiji T u, the enduring diagram
made famous by Zhou Dunyi, which depicts Yin and Yang as complements within
a circle, or as belonging together in a greater whole.
The Scale of Two, polarity or dichotomy, takes many forms, and it is very
important to note that not all possible pairs fit into the Rou and Gang ( Yin and
Yang) system of