ith the foresighted sage. Now he heads up the rear guard, trying to cover his tail,
leading the wrong crowd forward. This makes him as bait for unwanted attentions,
the loose ends that need tying up. Now he is left alone to face the thing that turned
his whole group around. When someone is this completely surrounded, any move
in any direction is moving far too far forward. Maybe it’s best to fade a little faster
than hope, withdraw all the outward signs and become a part of the scenery. A shrub
or a stone might be good, anything nobody wants. Or else he could look like a scout
for the foe and show them which way he ran off to. The average can be a fine retreat.
33.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 44: Gou, Dissipation
(Fan Yao 44.2: creel holds fish, not wrong not serving guests)
Tie it up with yellow rawhide
No one succeeds in getting it  loose
33.2x Bound with yellow cow(hide):
Firmness (of) purpose
It is time to leave in a hurry. He knows that he can’t take everything with him. Alas,
he has a fine thing that he must leave behind. A good thing is hard to come by these
days and he knows a good thing when he sees one. It disgusts him so to think of his
wonderful thing in the hands of inferior people, so he makes his thing inaccessible,
that it might be there upon his return. It makes him feel so secure to know that his
thing is secure. But he has to tie it up well, and tie it to something immobile: those
loose ends are also good handles. And maybe he ought not to make it look precious.
This may not be much of a problem, until the cost of his worries exceeds the worth
of the thing, or unless he makes his thing so secure he deprives himself of its use.
Too much insurance may show too little perspective. And none of this is freedom.253

33.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 12: Pi, Separating
(Fan Yao 12.3: embracing the unworthy)
Entangled retreat
There will be anxiety and distress
To manage one’s servants and concubines would have been timely.
33.3x Entangled retreat has distress,
There will be anxiety (and) exhaustion
* Managing (one’s) servants (and) concubines
 (would have been) timely:
But not suited to crucial concerns
His retreat is nerve-racking and tangled. The orders to evacuate were given long ago.
The city’s defenses crumble. Barbarians march up the street. He should have been
gone long ago, with his retinue firmly in tow,  already safe in his mountain retreat.
But he still runs around the house in distress, helping his servants to pack up their
things, helping his concubines pick out the right clothes. The complexities here want
something more expeditious: great affairs are not dealt with this way. Alhough his
caring for them is commendable, he’s supposedly some kind of leader, at least in a
minor capacity. He still lacks the proper perspective and the distance to lead them all
to success. This is not time for fraternity and equality, or micromanagement either.
Conditions need a master and a master needs to do triage, bid them follow, then go.
33.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.4: goose advances to trees, to find a flat branch)
Elective retreat
The noble young one’s opportunity
The common people deny
33.4x The noble young one chooses retreat
(While) common people deny
Knowing which way to face in retreat is knowing how to save face. Young nobles
want spine and self-rule. When compelling reasons to go be come known, those of
noble character choose what they want, then elect to sever their ties in some manner
permitting return. Then they rise, and say their goodbyes, and then go. Of course it
might be noticed that they have changed their minds, and of course they might still
love what they leave. Now those of a lesser character must take a more difficult route
and things can get much more complex. First they must make themselves unhappy,
in order to make those around them unhappy. This festers awhile, then it makes the
whole situation reject them. This is just like acne or boils: out they pop like pimples.
This is how disease