in
46

Gardner on the Mathematics of the “I Ching,” which discusses t hese
probabilities. For the coin method, the odds are 1/8, 3/8, 3/8 and 1/8 for 6, 7, 8 and
9 respectively. For the bu s hi method, these are 1/16, 5/16, 7/16 and 3/16. So,
while the odds of a line being an old or young Yin are equal to those of it being
an old or young Yang, one is three times as likely to draw an old Yang over an
old Yin. In other words, the advice would tend to be: too vigorous, slow down. If
these odds are still acceptable, then this is how the bu shi method works:
Begin with 50 yarrow stalks of a comfortable length (8-12 inches?). Set one
aside for the duration of the operation: this is the watcher, and it plays no further
role. 1) Divide the remaining bundle at random into right and left hand. 2) Pull
one stalk from the right hand and place it between the ring and little fingers of the
left. 3) Set the right hand bunch down for a moment and count out the left hand
bunch in groups of four, not counting the one pulled in step two. You will be left
with 1, 2, 3 or 4 stalks. 4) Place these with the single stalk between fingers, pick
up the right hand bundle and count by fours again, keeping the remaining 1, 2, 3
or 4 with the others. 5) You should now have either 5 or 9 stalks in your hand.
Set these aside. 6) Now take the remaining 40 or 44 stalks and repeat steps one
through five. This time your remainder will be either 4 or 8 stalks. Put these in a
pile alongside the first one. 7) Take the remaining stalks and again repeat steps
one through 5. Your remainder will again be 4 or 8 stalks. These go alongside the
first two piles. 8) You now have three piles, 5 or 9, 4 or 8, and 4 or 8. Count 9’s
and 8’s as Two, 5’s and 4’s as Three, and add them up, to a number between Six
and Nine. 9) All of this gives you your First or Bottom Line. 10) Repeat steps one
through eight five more times, beginning with forty-nine stalks each time. The
result is six lines, and your initial Hexagram or Ben Gua . Now follow the
instructions given 
in the last section on Hexagram Structure, to construct a
Hexagram and locate the indicated texts.
Interpreting the Response. Readers who come to the Yijing in search of a
fortune teller, seeking objective answers to questions about their fate, soon learn
that this function of the book is not its driving purpose, but merely its customary
and initiatory means of access; it might even be called the bait, used to draw the
unsuspecting into divination's deeper realms. When this play of meaning is not
observed, the Yijing’s ambiguities and ambivalences must be explained away by
such observations as: the book is so vague and obtuse that almost anything can
be read into it. The Yi will always attract a proportion of readers with questions
such as: Will this scheme make me rich? W ill so-and-so requite my deep passion
and longing? W ill this costume bring out my true self? And these people will
continue to read in and take back out exactly what they wish to see. Per haps
they will refer to a symbol dictionary or a dream interpretation handbook to learn
what the Yi’s images and metaphors are supposed t o mean, not having a clue of
their own that Sovereign might be referring to their own command functions. The
Yi’s advice “to be led like a sheep, regrets would pass” will continue to go right
over their heads, as the Yi predicts, but perhaps this advice i
s best taken literally.
These people might be happier under the guidance of a pastor.
47

As a matter of course, and by necessity, we move through our lives with a set
of assumptions and perceptions which are woven into, and intricately bound up
with, the personalities, the selves which we have become the sum of. And we do
not always appreciate being pulled out of these assumptions and perceptions, and
asked to take another point of view, by another person in person, even when we
understand that to allow this would serve our best interests. In the Yijing we
have found another way