am
Worthwhile to be dedicated
The sovereign prepares to go beyond, to learn of a greater glory, to leap beyond the
limited. His ancestor’s message, his story, is heard across the ages. His own will be
one day as well, carried on by the memory of life. Friends might reach out to friends
across the great stretches of time, from thousands of years and cultu res away. Life
will distribute its life, as evolution diversifies forms. It will change some things into
others. Life is not diminished thus: the web grows tighter and stronger, ecosystems
gain depth. But communing with these higher powers, with the forces that encircle
the world and carry themselves down through the ages, will in some way demand
our surrender, some degree of change in ourselves so complete that we might not be
recognized later. A little pond turns itself into a cloud to cross the desert’s expanse.
The teacher survives the dark ages by becoming a couple of stories. The sovereign
is carried by the memory of his reign. As a single flower becomes a thousand seeds,
this life will soon be gone: into every niche it can find and take hold in. Thus we can
reappear in many places at once. A kind of informed light was all that we ever were.
407

59.M, Key Words
Distribute, disperse, disseminate, propagate, dispel, diffuse; to broadcast, as seed
Dissociate, disincorporate, sublimate, dissolve, dissipate, rarify, diversify, expand
The mystic’s truth, reintegration with a higher unity, ecstasy, surrender, embrace
Changes of state: melt, dissolve, evaporate, evanescence; subtlety, metasolutions
Disintegrate, reintegrate, a breakup or breakdown of structure; reunion, salvation
Transcendence, metamorphosis, sublimation, opening up, letting go, going to seed
59.G, From the Glossary
huan4 (a, the) diffusion, sublimation, distillation, evaporation, rarifaction, broad-
cast (as seed); [change of state]; (to) disperse, scatter, distribute, disseminate, dis-
pel, break up, disintegrate, dissolve, clear up, relax, relieve, melt, vanish, diffuse,
evaporate, flow in scattered directions, rarify; fade, relent, give way, succumb
(s, ed, ing); (to be) slack, broad, swelling, wide, scattered, diffuse, evanescent,
dispersed, volatile
59.T, Tuan Zhuan
Scattering fulfills
The firm comes forward, yet will not be exhausted
The flexible learns (its) place on the outside
And associates with the superior
The sovereign approaches his temple:
The sovereign is then in the center
Worthwhile to cross the great stream:
Relying on wood brings results
408

59.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.1: readiness promising, presuming more, no comfort)
Rely on assistance
The horse is powerful
Promising
59.1x First six holds promise:
(In) acceptance
Reaching beyond our selves and our own resources is our first movement into the
greater world. Surrender to higher powers and forces is frightening to young egos,
so the next state above and beyond this is made to look more familiar. The f orces
which heal or aid us are totems with animal powers, or medicines which embody an
animal’s special gift. The one who will save us from human error looks human too,
except for transcending error. Paths are set forth for the newly arrived.  But most of
us will not soon outgrow them. When we need strength, endurance and power, why
not reach into dream time and ride a totem horse? Piglets would perceive the divine
as infinite food and mud. Fishes would see this as water. Humans, as all we could
wish for, or someone to set us some limits. We will have what we are ready to have.
59.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.2: prying perspective profits a girl’s persistence)
Scattering, then hurrying to one’s support
Regrets pass
59.2x Scattering, (then) hurrying to one’s support:
To secure the hopes
He has a little idea of how the universe works. Invoking often has helped him get
used to some other perspectives. He still rubs his thing for good luck; his idols are
well-fed and shiny. When troubled,