harvest, still have direction)
Treading the path which is level and easy
The secluded one’s persistence is promising
10.2x The secluded one’s persistence (is) promising:
The middle avoids the source of distraction
At some point in time the tigers and deer might have taken this path. Then came the
first pioneers, on the lookout for tigers and hungry for deer. Then came the lusty
and boisterous men with their shovels and picks and their plan to tame this terrain.
Now treading on routes trod before, far from all tigers and trials, the followers move,
nothing to kill them, nothing to make them stronger, the journey of muted surprises.
The map says where to go and where the scenic wonders will be. And if you look on
the back of the map all of your questions are answered. It’s easy to stay in bounds,
in the middle of the wide open road, with plenty of room to maneuver. Modest goals,
attainable steps and plausible expectations, who can truly know these are worse than
death and insanity? Than cracking open the mind, or shattering views  of the world?
115

10.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.3: noble one, all day creating, looking frightful)
The one-eyed are still able to see
The lame are still able to take steps
Treading upon the tiger’s tail
Is the bitten one’s misfortune
The military man works for a greater noble
10.3x The one-eyed (are still) able to see:
Not well enough to claim vision
* The lame (are still) able to take steps:
Not well enough to travel along with
* The bitten one’s misfortune:
The position was less than appropriate
* The military man works for a greater noble:
The purpose (is) firm
Something makes us think that a good human effort will accomplish any miracle.
We have ourselves convinced that we are what we dream we can be, that we are what
our best have accomplished and that we still live means that we are now fully tested.
We make gods to call us their chosen, while the average man’s vote on the matter
makes it so by consensus. But each human is as each human does, and all humans
are the mess that all humans make. This will be the tiger’s point of view. We might
go on deluding ourselves, seeing just well enough, but without a good perspective,
lacking half of the picture, walking just well enough but not for steps that we skip.
We act on behalf of the Lord, yet we will not do our best, much less more. A tiger
will tear off what he can chew, but a whole half-witted fool isn’t more than a bite.
10.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.4: moon approaches full, the team horse runs away)
Treading upon the tiger’s tail
Pleading (and) appealing will end in good fortune
10.4x Pleading (and) appealing will end in good fortune:
The intentions (are) carried out
The plan to tread the tiger’s tail is one thing, while to go forth and walk that walk
is another. Metaphors, analogies, symbols and plans are unable to bleed to death.
It is one thing to say that respect will be called for, quite another to know what this
means. Being the favorite children of the one who created the sky full of stars, we
do not do well when up against things equal to or better than we are, and the tiger
is merely a beast and no peer, and has no soul and will not go to heaven. Thoughts
like these will one day pass, torn from our way of thinking one bloody bite at a time.
The one who wants to survive this challenge, and not be the meal today, might put
himself into perspective and find the respect which regards the tiger as sovereign.
Not tigers in general either. Feeling oh so very frail and tasty: oh please, oh please!
116

10.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.5: their kind eats flesh, in going what error?)
Decisive steps
Persistence is stressful
10.5x Decisive steps, persistence (is) stressful:
The position (is) correct (and) appropriate
You are just about ready to do your next and best act, a romp with a real, live tiger.
You have trained for long hours with the tamer of two, the one that ex