es are as likely to have a common source in the broader culture.
The Zuozhuan  (Zuo’s Commentary on the Spring and Autumn period) and
the Guoyu (the Discourse on the States, during the Spring and Autumn) are the
earliest certain references. While these illustrate that the Yi was in fact in practice
as both a divination text and a book worth quoting, they offer little by way of
explicit examination of either the structure or the function of the Yi. The Lunyu
(the Analects of Kongfuzi) probably says nothing of the Yi. Xun Zi (298-238), a
Confucian and something of a proto-legalist, quotes the Yi to support arguments
---------------------
* An exception may be Buddhism, introduced from India in the early 1st century BCE.
This was significantly altered from the original teachings after it entered China, but any
specific marks made by the Yi itself are not very distinct. The Yijing developed the concept
of Conditioned Arising (Li, 30.T) long before Buddhist influence, but the Buddhist Paticca
Samuppada is of independent origin, if not unconditioned arising.
514

and discusses the still-extraneous ideas of Yin and Yang (mentioned also in the
Zuozhuan and only once by Laozi) and the Wu Xing  or Five Agents (also found
in the Shujing, the Zuozhuan and Mozi). Both Shchutskii and Fung have more to
say on these references.
Yin, Yang and Wu Xing date at least from the Spring and Autumn. So do the
Yijing’s own Ba Gua, in inner and outer places (these are first mentioned in the
Zuozhuan, but they may go back to the eleventh century). Astrology ( tian w en
or xing ming ) was already studying the twenty-eight mansions of the sky and the
movements of Sol, Luna and five of the planets. The Almanacs (li pu) continued
to refine the Shang (Yin) dynasty Chinese calendar, using tw enty four seasonal
markers (which featured the equinoxes and solstices), as well as the Ten Celestial
Stems and the Tw elve Earthly Branches. There was m agic and “resonance” in
music as well, and this was connected with the scales of five and twelve.
The first thinker to begin to knit these systems together in an orderly way
was Zou Yan (305-240), the founder of Yinyang Jia, or the Yin-Yang School. He
is known to us primarily through the historian Sima Qian (145-86). Zou Yan lived
in the state of Qi, which bordered the sea, and this was probably a factor in his
broad range of interests - some of his ideas came from distant places. This may be
attested to by his statements that: a) China was only one part in eighty-one of the
earth (it has now grown to one in fifty-three), b) that in places the sun t raveled
through the four directions without setting, and c) that south of China was a land
where there were no shadows at noon. In other words, some of his out-land-ish
ideas were attempts to put new notions, to the culture at least, into old words.
Zou Yan is now credited with combining the Yin-and-Yang polarity, the Five
Agents, the Twelve Moons, the Five Notes and the Twelve Notes into a system.
Later, his school would include the Four Directions, the Four Seasons, the Ten
Celestial Stems and the Twelve Earthly Branches. Note that the Si Xiang , the
Four Emblems, and the Ba Gua, the Eight Trigrams, are still missing. Combination
and systemization concentrated on the relative meanings of the symbols as they
compared to each other within the context of
 specific, graphically expressible
matrices. Then arguments were drawn from the analogies, a process which is both
productive of insight and logically fallacious. Much was made too of fortune,
luck, magic, prayer and omen. This school probably had little, if any, influence on
the Shi Yi or Ten Wings: the Wing authors still had access to the original streams,
but they had, for instance, nothing to do with the Wu Xing . However, this Yin-
Yang school would play an important role in two future currents, discussed later
(Xiang Shu and Fang Shi , which were to be recombined in the Song dynasty).
In 221, the Warring States period and