ao gua (reverse): 36, Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
35, Notes
* 35.X The invisible hand image comes from Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations. It
isn’t gratuitously that I bring in free market economics here. This is one of the main
themes of this Gua. Beware of having a typical reaction here, though, and confusing
free market economics with modern corporate capitalism. There’s a big difference.
* 35.0 Kang, the youngest of Wen Wang’s three sons, (c. 1027 
BCE), the elder two
being Wu Wang and Zhou Gong. Here he seems to have set examples in free
market (or laissez faire) economics, and granted certain broad liberties to his people
“with hope for superior conduct.”
* 35.1 Three li is about a mile.
35, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Binah in Atziluth
* Tarot: Three of Wands
* Astrology: Neptune in Fire
35, Quotations
* Go and wake up your luck. —Persian proverb
* The flow of energy through a system acts to organize that system.
—Harold Morowitz, Energy Flow in Biology
* That government is best which governs least.
—Thomas Paine (Quoted by Thoreau)
* He who maketh no secret of himself shocketh: so much reason have ye to fear
nakedness! Aye, if ye were gods, ye could then be ashamed of clothing! Oh!
your poverty ye men, and your sordidness of soul! As much as ye give to your
friend, will I give even to my foe, and will not have become poorer thereby.
—Nietzsche, TSZ #14
* The greatest obstacle to progress is not man’s inherited pugnacity, but his
incorrigible tendency to parasitism. —William Ralph Inge
* If you want to be free, there is but one way; it is to guarantee an equally full
measure of liberty to all your neighbors. There is no other. —Carl Schurz
* To know ourselves as this free, creative energy is to know the meaning of life in
this world. —Bruno Barnhart
268

GUA 36, MING2 YI2, BRIGHTNESS OBSCURED
 
  Binary 101 000 = 40; Li below, Kun above
36.X, Overall Image
The light goes within to the heart of the earth
Brightness Obscured
The noble young one, accordingly, manages the multitude
using darkness, but with intelligence
The sun disappears for the night, going elsewhere to shine and giving relief from
the heat. The stove is closed up tightly and the glowing coals are banked with earth
to maintain the flame through the night. All of those beings who live in the shadows
can come out to play. Through civilization’s dark times and ages, wisdom, culture
and hope itself might go underground. Intelligence learns of reasons it has to hide,
to hold the light in trust for better days to come. Wise ones might be well-hidden,
showing few outward signs, guarded in expression, even restrained in acts of good
conscience and unadmired by choice. In such hands even ignorance serves the light.
36.0, Brightness Obscured
Warranting difficult persistence
Dust settles on cultures and civilizations when the golden ages have run their course.
Life has managed to tough it out through extremely severe and dark times, and even
some mass extinctions, lasting millions of years. So what are a couple of centuries
of stupidity and tyrants? The sage may stand in line with the masses, dressed up so
the dark one sees nothing, wearing what looks like a noose or a leash, as tractable on
the surface as one of the castrated herd. When packaged wisdom is bought and sold
he just jingles his coins and lets fall some drool, too bright for the dimwits to see.
The tyrant will have no use for this sage’s wisdom. He will not be shown that most
precious of all things to point to: an enemy with a clear agenda. Attracting attention,
except by misdirection, attracts much of doubtful value. The mother bird may feign
a wound, to distract predators from her young, but her first choice is staying hidden.
Resistance is avoided: this becomes heat and then light. We do not need to carry the
flame if we carry the know-how to get the flame started. We will not need to carry
whole cultures, but it’s good to cache the brig