s wants a more worthy
response than a lost will to live. A stunned acceptance is not a great way to accept.
362

51.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.5: trusting in excellence, promising)
The shock whether going or coming is trouble
The intentions* will not be lost where there is work to be done
51.5x The shock (whether) going (or) coming (is) trouble:
Exposure (in) action
* (Where) one’s work to be done lies in the middle
Completely without loss
Shock comes bringing lots of excitement, and plenty of power to move anywhere,
right, left, or wrong. One may choose and embrace the pro or the con and thus gain
fully half of the power at hand, but only to face its equal when equations resolve into
zero. Take a look at the one who walks the high wire: he does his business by going
straight forward, calmly in concentration, along his narrow, middle path. His right
and left are equally wrong and inferior as choices, but they are also equally useful
in keeping his balance. All movement helps him go forward. Right and left, in such
cases, can be said to belong to a lesser dimension, a greater one being success in life
and continuing to go forward. The forces and the movements not central to the work
can still be taken and turned, thought of as vectors, or made to serve higher purpose.
51.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua* 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao* 21.6: wearing the cangue, hiding ears, unfortunate)
The shock startles and confuses
Searching in wild-eyed panic
To go boldly is ominous
The shock is not in one’s being
Merely in one’s neighborhood
Make no mistakes
Even the marital suitor* might  have something to say
51.6x The shock startles (and) confuses:
The balance is not yet achieved
* Even though ominous, make no mistakes:
Pay heed to the neighboring warnings
Explosive shock brings ruin all the way up to his doorstep. This is about as close up
as vicarious ever gets. His neighbors are in big trouble but cannot seem to respond
in appropriate ways. Yet it isn’t a failure of sympathy to refuse to go out for his own
fair share of misfortune. He cannot be of much use to his neighbors if first he fails
to save himself. It may be with the warmest intentions that he casts his cold gaze on
their wild-eyed panic and judges their terror for things not to do. It might leave him
able to help when he can. Now the neighbors are object lessons, materials for study.
Heeding their words of warning can be as effective as having this shocking thing
happen directly to him. Any small part of the greater event, even the poor, confused
victim, might hold some useful intelligence, or first-rate second-hand information.
363

51, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 57, Xun, Adaptation
qian gua (inverse): 52, Gen, Stillness
jiao gua (reverse): 51, Zhen, Arousal (chong gua 4)
hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
51, Notes
*  51.0 Li is a unit of distance, about 1/3 mile or 500 meters. Laozi’s “journey of a
thousand miles” is really 500 kilometers. It still begins with the first step, though.
*  51.5 See Source Text Discrepancies and Emendations, below the Matrix section.
The alternative  yi4 would refer back to line 51.2 and would be translated as: “(The)
hundred thousand w ill not be lost (where) there is work to be done.” Or else:
“(The) hundred thousand is not a loss (where) there is work to be done.”
* 51.6 The poor marital suitor, with elaborate costume and one-track mind, figures
several times as a Clown or Fool figure in the Zhou Yi. In his simple-minded inno-
cence he is often the blank screen upon which the fantasies of others are projected.
This Gua is about what Carlos Castaneda calls “being a hunter of power.” The Zhi
Gua, 21, Biting Through, suggests objectivity, or not taking the thunder personally.
The Fan Yao 21.6 warns against the perils of ignorance, the consequence of ignor-
ing information, which might here be found even in the least likely place. Take the
free opportunity, apprender en cabez