til (one) wanders with humility 
This principle (is) lost 
Of course the stranger is the primary suspect. He is only the wrong kind of wanted  
right now. Nobody knows where he comes from or goes. The world is wide, harsh   
and demanding, a school apt to toughen the kindest of nomads into a hardened old  
rogue. Condescension repels those who might aid him; and carelessness might burn  
down an inn. One does not make a life of building so many fires without some scars  
and burns, or without learning ways to defend oneself. Still must one guard against  
hardness of heart. Sense, sensibility and sensitivity are assets too precious to lose.  
Conscientiousness, conscience and consciousness are all the same traveler’s tool.  
He has had far too little to lose here. Although he would soon move on, now is the  
worst time for leaving. Although he has nothing now, now is the best time to give.  
 
56.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness 
(Fan Yao 52.4: stilling one’s being, not a mistake) 
The wanderer stays in a shelter 
Having secured some wherewithal and an axe 
But lamenting “My heart is not at peace” 
56.4x The wanderer (stays) in a shelter: 
(Having) not yet secured a place 
* Securing some valuables (and) an axe: 
(But with) a heart less than peaceful 
The wanderer locates a shelter, a little less than accommodating, but better by far  
than his own naked skin. Inside he’s found an axe and some clothing, with enough  
dust on top to lay claim, and he still has most of his money. And yet he doubts his  
good fortune. Some exotic adventure this has turned out to be! The oxcarts rumble  
and creak overhead. His long-sought vista across the great water is just an uneasy  
watch from a hole. His axe feels more like a weapon than a tool, and his money feels  
more like bail or bribe. Instead of cavorting with the belly dancers, he gets to throw  
rocks at the rats. The road can get old; so can not bathing. But if the whole world  
is going to be his home, sometimes he will stay in the outhouse. To make himself at  
home is his job, and he’s only halfway home. He lies down to dream of tomorrow. 
392

56.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.5: commendable retreat, persistence is promising)
Hunting a pheasant
One arrow is lost
But in the end, a means to recognition and appointment
56.5x In the end a means to recognition (and) appointment:
A superior reach
In a distant land with no home or friend, on a journey with no beginning or end, the
wanderer still has his best tools: modesty, tact and, above all, his wits. Knowing the
worth of a good introduction, he shoots a pheasant to give to the local land’s lord.
While he has lost a much-valued arrow, he has gained a fine introduction and, if he
wants it, both praise and office. If not, at least another hot meal. He hits on the right
idea with a clarity of aim and not such a very long shot. The lord will know his peer
when he meets one, by style and noble gesture, if not by his fancy palace. Again his
good fortune has cost so very little, and he stays in a mansion instead of an inn. The
whole point of being a seeker is found in being a finder. Here it is finding out where
to alight, and how to come highly recommended, with only behavior for references.
56.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
(Fan Yao 62.6: passing without greeting, calamity and suffering)
Like a bird that burns its own nest
This strange individual begins to laugh
Then follows with wailing and weeping
Forfeiting cattle in the exchange
Disappointing
56.6x Considering that the wanderer is at the top
This one is understandably burned
* Forfeiting cattle in the exchange:
In the end, nobody comes to enquire
This rogue has too much self in his head. This place might have been his to enjoy,
had he only valued the small things more, had he only been a much worthier guest.
Humility being a thing for the oxen, his boasts soon make an end to his welcome.
Thinking himself quite the phoenix, he sets his own