tress on a particular line, this sets up a movement
between two of the diagrams. Since the diagrams, by this point in history, now
have particular meanings, the change indicated by the particular line will have a
meaning partway between those of the two Gua, but in the direction or a state of
transition from the original or root ( Ben) to the consequent or resultant ( Zhi). Just
as one might interpolate between one and two to arrive at one-point-five, the
Duke of Zhou, or someone in his good name, began to interpolate between Gua
meanings to arrive at meanings for the stressed or changing lines. As t hese
meanings began to take shape, they began to behave as their parent Gua before
them and build up their meanings by accretion and incorporation. These lines
could also be swept clean of any useless accretions through the divination
process and unsuccessful brushes against the real world. The Duke of Zhou is,
according to legend, 
credited with the process of developing and setting forth
this next body of text, for which there are six-times-sixty-four, or 384 sections,
organized beneath their relevant parent Gua. This body of text is known as the
Yao Ci, or the Changing Line Text.
492

The concept of interpolation discussed above is not complex, nor does this
involve much detailed thought: one line changes into its opposite, two diagrams
are seen, the meaning is partway between the two. And so it is truly astounding
how few interpreters and translators in the Yi’s three thousand year history have
demonstrated even the slightest hint of its comprehension in their attempts to
explain the construction of meaning in the Yao Ci.  Of all of the work done and
available in English on the Yi, only Hellmut Wilhelm, the son of Richard, bothers
to develop this idea in analysis of some of the lines. [Hellmut seems to be another
fine example of a son continuing, rather than merely preserving, a good father’s
work]. Mondo Secter, Bruce Hamerslough and Stephen Karcher also had at least
a glimpse of this. When this simple dimension of interpolation is kept in the mind
while translating the lines, good things happen. Order and meaning often appear.
A great deal of far-fetched, even fatuous, speculation on line meanings, which
was to occupy later scholars both within the ten canonized appendices and
throughout the Han dynasty, could have been avoided. This dimension will be
named and discussed in more detail below, and in Di mensions, under Gua Bian ,
the Hexagram Changes.
These two bodies of text, the Gua Ci  and the Yao Ci, when taken together,
are known as the Zhouyi, or the Changes o f Zhou. They were developed, added
to and edited over a period which spanned nearly three centuries, or the period
known as the Early or Western Zhou dynasty. They now seem to have received a
final editing or polishing at some time towards the end of this period i
n 771, but
perhaps still in the 800’s. The Hexagram names or titles, which are called the Gua
Ming, may not have been assigned until a little later than this, but they seem to
have been in place by the year 672. It is also quite possible that there was, in the
Early Zhou, a different method for designating the lines (to be discussed later).
The method which we now have is easier, but it demands less understanding.
The new Zhou dynasty represented a radical departure only from the last few
decades of the Shang, from the reign of a sovereign who had lost the way and the
Mandate of Heaven. At least two of the Shang sovereigns just prior to Zhou Xin
had practiced reasonably enlightened rule and they are praised for their merit in
the Zhouyi itself. On the whole, Chinese culture would continue to evolve at a
slow, steady pace and this evolution would involve its own share of backsliding.
But to understand the attitudinal  context within which the Zhouyi was written,
one must assume a climate full of optimism: it was the dawn of a new era, where at
last sweeping changes could be contemplated. The first few lay