,
Satisfaction and Success (for Heng) and Determination, Persistence and Resolve
(for Zhen) some other English examples are Awe (terror and wonder), Capacity
(emptiness is capacity, capacity is 
power, and emptiness is power), Responsibility
(similar to Fitness) and Concentration (as in concentric, being only in the enter,
focused, yet being in the center of everything and in the place which is handiest
to all options).
In conclusion, I have used many English Janus words quite deliberately to
translate Chinese Janus words. And I do not think this is anachronistic. At least I
am hypothesizing that several of these are not anachronisms at all, but blind spots
in the academic studies. I think that the authors of the Zhouyi were eager to help
you get your mind around these larger ideas, and they used the terms in dozens of
places and from many angles, to facilitate this. However, it needs to be clearly
stipulated that where you see fulfillment, satisfaction or success in the translation
the recipient is assumed to be holding up one end of the bargain with 'the spirits,'
and that where you see resolve, determination or persistence the practitioner also
requires some basis in fact, some timing with the pulse of the w orld, not merely a
senseless and stubborn effort.
Narrow Glosses (Words)
The methodologies of the modernists, particularly context criticism and
etymology, offer a very narrow band of allowable meanings for the Chinese terms
23

used in the Zhouyi. If something is glossed in it's day as big, it is too much of a
stretch to say great; if great, too much stretch to say grown; if grown, too much
stretch to say adult; if adult, too much stretch to say mature. And don't even think
of translating big as mature. It could more easily be argued that the oldest words
in a language will tend to have a broader set of meanings and implications, and
that the exactness and specificity came later. I submit that the meanings derived
by context criticism are far too narrow for the broader applications intended by
the authors and which are necessary to the proper use of an oracle. I will not
argue that these narrower meanings do not belong in a Yi glossary, or that they
do not belong among the options for translation. But to take these meanings as
the terra firma on which to erect an edifice is to commit the logical fallacy known
as “hasty generalization.” The discovery of another word meaning in use at this
time does not of itself make this a primary meaning.
The Zhouyi was written with a vocabulary of less than 900 characters. The
text of the first four Wings adds less than 300 to this. Yet it attempts to use this
basic vocabulary to scope and encompass many of the broadest realms of human
experience. After mentally setting aside the advances and the advantages of our
modern culture and civilization, I still find it hard to believe that a Bronze Age
people, with neural structures as complex as our own (especially at the literate
level of the shapers of a culture explicitly in search of wen ming, refinement and
clarity) would have as impoverished a mental life as these narrow glosses would
seem to imply and yet still be able to write text which intrigues us with its insights
and relevance today.
There is something big missing in the s imple equation of modern English
and ancient Chinese as languages: that a word is a word with a definition held in
common and that a translation 
is simply a word substitution exercise. There are
many enormous differences between these two languages. For example, a typical
English dictionary might have 200,000 entries, while its Chinese counterpart will
have only 8,000. If one simple-mindedly assumes a rough equality of linguistic
and mental capability between two native s peakers, this might suggest that an
English gloss of a Chinese word would be, or even should be, more than twenty
times as “messy” as a Chinese gloss of an English word. Add to this the fact that
Chinese grammar often uses only context  to