bolden, enliven,
encourage, enspirit, invigorate, animate, make better; (grow, wax) strong (s, ed, ing)
34.T, Tuan Zhuan
Big (and) strong
Greatness is that which is strong
The firm applies force
Hence, strength
Big (and) strong, worthwhile to persist:
Greatness implies being correct
Be correct in greatness and then heaven (and) earth
Will now have natures (which) may be seen plainly
258

34.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.1: digging in to continue, no merit in direction)
Powerful in the toes
To go boldly bodes ill for staying confident
34.1x Powerful in the toes:
Such confidence (is soon) exhausted
Thinking to go by leaps and bounds, with great and powerful strides, he summons
great vigor into his toes. But l ittle is left to power his mind. Were a stone to jump
into the path ahead, which heaven does not forbid, it would trip him up before he
could think to jump over it. Vigor like this might go a step further and punish that
stone with a powerful kick. Two defeats from an unarmed rock will surely lead to
loss of self-confidence. What a fate, and not the no-brainer it seems. Might does not
make right and impetuousness is not the best source of impetus. It’s not the critter
who kicks the most butt who persists: the one best fit to its place will have the power
to stay. The toes, and kicks too, are great things. The fetus first learns about life by
kicking the womb, spending force to see what gives. But brains should co-evolve.
34.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.2: in going, distrust, anxiety, be true, express it)
Persistence is promising
34.2x Nine second’s persistence (is) promising:
Using balance
What is persistence? What does it promise? Persisting is going through to an end
and still be standing there. Persevering goes through more severe times to an end
and may be barely still standing. But the only promise to trust is that you then get
to see what is there at the end. That will also mean you’ve succeeded. It can also be
promised that something important will change between here and there, and that is
why persistence should never mean staying the same. One balances the force with
restraint. Momentum and inertia are very handy things, but they’ll fight any change
of direction. Equilibrium is just as important. Look at the the conquering hero who
calls up all of his strength to open up a passage, but finds that the door offers li ttle
resistance. So he falls mightily flat on his face: a bad way to treat good momentum.
259

34.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.3: marries as bondmaid, turnaround to be 2nd wife)
Ordinary people apply force
The noble young one uses his wits*
Persistence is trouble
The billy goat* butts the hedge
Entangling his horns
34.3x Ordinary people apply force:
(To) the noble young one, a snare*
The goal of the ram or he goat is simple: out, now, and beyond all of this. He throws
all of his weight straight at the problem, head first, his headlong rush only numbing
his skull even further. This is a bone-headed way to do things. He has lots of nerve,
but none in his horns and not much more in his head. Then he exhausts himself in
fighting his own entanglements. Horns are not made like antennae, for sensing the
new opportunities. Inferior men might spend all of their strength like this, fighting
existence first, then the consequences of previous actions. Average men might try
a few times, then look for a better way. The wise have rules about this sort of thing:
their heads are their friends, not hammers and bludgeons. Just one assassin can win
a war that thousands of soldiers lose. The wise use neural nets to get that net result.
34.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.4: fluttering, fussing, don't limit use of sincerity)
Persistence is promising
While regrets pass
The hedge opens with no entanglement
The power in the great vehicle is in its axle’s mount
34.4x The hedge opens up with no entanglements:
Appreciate going forward
T