algorithms. Several hidden structures do in fact
exist behind the text: these were often the primary source of the verbal images, as
will be made clearer in Dimensions. And even these added dimensions make
mathematical sense in the binary system of the Xian Tian  or Primal Heaven
Arrangement. But a number of the dimensions used by the Tuan Zhuan authors
were clearly not on the minds of the Zhouyi authors. What this error accomplish-
ed was to firmly and retroactively embed a number of anachronistic assumptions
into most future interpretations of the Zhouyi. At the same time, authors of the
Tuan Zhuan often overlooked specific fundamental dim ensions which clearly
were on the minds of the Zhouyi authors. With all of its shortcomings, but at least
this much content of valuable insights, the complete text of the Tuan Zhuan is
presented here, in both of the translations. The decision to not edit or highlight
this text for meaningful content was a difficult one. Readers should simply be
wary. My own sense of a rough target success ratio might be three hits in ten,
three misses in ten, and one in ten tries a bulls eye.
Wings Three and Four, known together as the Xiang Zhuan, or Commentary
on the Images, present two 
very different bodies of text, arranged by Hexagram.
Again, the division between the two Wings is not meaningful, but is done only to
divide text length. The authors of the two analyses clearly belonged to different
schools of thought.
The first text is called the Da Xiang, or the Overall Image. This study looks at
the individual Gua as the product of its two constituent Ba Gua or T rigrams in an
interactive relationship, and states that the Gua Ming or the Hexagram Name is
justified by the nature of that relationship. It then describes how this information
is or might be used by the Jun Zi, the Noble Young One (see Note at 01.3) or how
the image was used by the Xian Wang, the Early Sovereigns or the founders of
Chinese culture. It accomplishes all of this with an almost haiku-like brevity. The
only complaint of which this text is susceptible is that the natural metaphors used
in the first part are well enough chosen that they could have been elaborated
upon, even tripled in length, without beating the metaphor to death.
The second text is called the Xiao Xiang , or the L ittle Images. This is a line-
by-line commentary on the Yao Ci, or Changing Line Text. It usually begins by
quoting or referring to a portion of the Yao Ci  text and then explaining it, often
with reference to real or imaginary structural dimensions. And yet it completely
ignores the important dimension of interpolation discussed above. The school of
thought which authored this material is similar, if not identical, to the one which
authored the Tuan Zhuan , discussed above, and 
the same critique is applicable.
One unquestionable benefit of this commentary is that it will often rearrange the
499

grammatical structure of the original words which it quotes and in the process will
offer a new angle on the grammar and meaning of the original. The text of the
Xiang Zhuan , from the 3rd and 4th Wings, is offered here in its entirety, in both
translations. The Da Xiang  is presented with no reservations whatsoever, while
the Xiao Xiang is offered with the same reservations expressed for the Tuan
Zhuan, except that the Xiao Xiang authors should be credited with under-
standing at least some of the original Yao Ci’s obscure and frequent humor.
The Fifth and Sixth Wings comprise a single, two-part anthology of essays
on the overall nature of the Zhouyi, apparently by numerous authors, and leaning
heavily towards the metaphysical speculations of Kongfuzi’s followers. This text
was originally called the Da Zhuan , or the Great Treatise. Later, it came to be
known as the Xi Ci Zhuan , or the Commentary on the Appended Phrases. It is
widely claimed that this text m arked the beginning of real philosophy in China.
If this is true, then another name must be found fo