p, no bait, no line, no hook and no net, and
none of that water that fish like to swim in. He might have a room with a roof, but
where are the chairs and the candles, the wine, the music and the fire on the hearth?
He has only a cubit-wide mat on the floor and he’s only invited himself. Impatiently
pacing his floor now, he might even wonder why random chance is taking so long.
Maybe some sweet, young lady will wander by tonight, hungry and lost in his part
of the woods. Does he want someone on call? Those are nearly as costly as wives,
and girls on call walk the streets, not the trail. He has what he has asked for, but this
can all be rethought. Restraint becomes an unnatural act and is itself the distraction.
320

44.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.5: cauldron’s golden ears, rewarding to persist)
Wrapping the melons in willows
Restraint is displayed
They will have fallen from heaven
44.5x Nine fifth’s display (of) restraint:
(Of) concentration (and) integrity
* (These) will have fallen from heaven:
The intentions do not forsake higher purpose
All of the members come to his meeting, and he acts like a model host, serving his
fine food and drink. But all the green melons stay in the cellar, hidden from light
and view. Still deeper down, and covered with cobwebs and dust, are many rows of
tightly-corked bottles of wine. These melons and wine will one day be sacraments,
as though they had fallen from heaven. But heaven is not simply a place, or even all
places: it is all times as well, and the way times are strung together. There is much of
not yet in heaven, but not much too soon or too late. These melons and wine, given
our kind, but reserved, host’s assistance, will fall from the time of just right, when
heaven is ready as well. Haste is such a shallow thing, hardly worthy of sacraments.
Just like these melons and wine, our very best is sacred, and worthy of our patience.
44.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.6: too much to cross, over one’s head, blameless)
Encountering with those horns
Embarrassing
Though no harm is done
44.6x Encountering with those horns:
The top (is) exhausted (and) embarrassed
He has put all distractions aside and fought his way up to the top. He works at the
peak of his powers, with no time or strength for diversions. And so he may be, in a
roughish sense, blameless, when rebuffing what could be a warm encounter with
harshness and cold. It is more than a little rude to welcome your guests on the tips
of your horns. When alone for so long we forget all the measures and rules, while
that horn will not be forgotten. This is nothing about his ch oice in a mate for life.
But there is more to life than the work, and work and its fruits have meaning only
when shared. This meaning does not have to wait for an end or completion, which
might not even be coming if this much stress means exhaustion. Given these signs,
it might even be worth the sacrifice to set the work down and try instead to relate.
321

44, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 24, Fu, Returning
qian gua (inverse): 43, Guai, Decisiveness
jiao gua (reverse): 09, Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 31, 33, 49, 13
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 5th Moon (Jun)
44, Notes
* 44.0 As fun as this symbolism is, this hexagram really isn’t about the sexes or
their battles. Nor is it about empowered  or liberated women, even though women
who fancy themeselves as such will almost invariably seize upon this notion. This is
just a metaphor the authors used. It's about the good fight against dissipation or
entropy, that describes both life and intelligence. Nothing is more distracting to
higher purpose than attraction to the opposite sex. The symbolism was irresistable.
* 44.2 The fish symbol usually refers to the unfair sex, although nobody has ever
figured out the two reasons why. Anyone who has read the speculative history
here knows that I thi