d according to the harder facts
of life, whenever it failed to work. The diviners at the royal court still had strong
incentives to be accurate.
Because of this accretion and incorporation of older materials, the Yi can be
said to have put roots into the mulch of earlier times and dynasties. But to say
that it 
originated earlier is too much of a stretch. Now, return for a moment to
ancestor worship. By this light, and without much evidence to the con trary, it is
then perfectly plausible that the Yi was developed, in even its basic form, much
later than 1048, and was given as a sacrificial gift to Ji Chang, who would by
now be a beloved ancestor. It may have been developed by a whole school of
diviners in the new dynasty, a school which spanned nearly three centuries in
performing its task (until some time around 800 BCE), and whose members felt so
small in relation to the scope of the work that to tag it with their own identities
might seem ludicrous. It would require a greater name than their own little names
to merit such a work.
The body of text accumulating to the sixty-four Gua, which constitutes the
Yi’s oldest sections, is sometimes called the Tuan, or Judgments, and sometimes
the Gua Ci, or Hexagram Texts. Here it is called the Gua Ci, to avoid confusion
with the Tuan Zhuan, the name of a later commentary.
Ji Chang died five years before the new Zhou dynasty’s founding. This
work fell into the worthy hands of two of his sons and a grandson. The eldest
son, Ji Fa, defeated the tyrant Zhou Xin in 1027 in a battle at Muye. He took the
name Wu Wang, the Martial or Warrior King. The center of political power moved
westward from Great City Shang, later called Yin, to Hao, south of the Wei River.
490

A feudal system, called feng jian, was instituted and fiefs were granted to family
and a llies. A third son, Kang Hou, became the first to receive such a fief. Wu
Wang had little time to establish the dynasty - he died only two years after the
Shang dynasty fell. He did have time to grant his father the post-humous title of
Wen Wang, the Literate or Civilizing Sovereign. His son, Ji Cheng, was still too
young to take to take up the reins of state, so his younger brother, Cheng’s uncle,
Ji Dan, reigned as regent for the next seven years until Cheng came of age. One
of Ji Dan’s ideas called for the subdivision of local lands into nine sections, three
by three, according to a system called jing tian, or the well-field system. The well
occupied the center, and the bounty from this tract, culti-vated in common by the
tenants of surrounding tracts, was the tribute to central government. Ji Dan is
better known as Zhou Gong or the Duke of Zhou (the duke, or gong, was the
highest aristocratic rank). Zhou Gong was one of the most admired figures in all
of Chinese history, the Solomon of the Far East. And he is the next major figure in
the Yi’s history.
The rationale for the next sections of text warrants some prior explanation.
Remember that the sixty-four Gua consist of six stacked lines, each of which is
either broken or solid; that each diagram is a unique combination of these six; and
that the sum of the sixty-four diagrams exhausts all of the possible combinations.
The set is finite or self-contained. And each mem ber of the set is by now imbued
with its own cluster of meanings. Where did the meanings come from?
In some cases the answer was 
obvious: the diagram itself may have borne a
resemblance to an artifact, such as a cauldron, or a phenomenon in nature, such as
a mouth, a mountain or a bird. There are questions now being raised in modern
scholarship about this topic and its assumptions, usually centered around a lack
of pictorial evidence that the Gua in fact had shape in this era. All that has been
found on oracle bones and early bronzes are suggestive numerals and shapes, but
nothing like the solid and broken lines we have today. Furthermore, the earliest
evidence that we do have depicts the Yin or broken line as ^ instead