* Thank Allah, for in his wisdom he put death at the end of life and not at its
beginning. —Arabic proverb
* Resist much, obey little. —Walt Whitman
* ... who wield a poem huger than the grave
from whom shall time no refuge keep
though all weird worlds must be opened? —e.e. cummings
* We are all in this alone. —Lily Tomlin
* Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere. —Shakespeare, Henry IV
* The more intelligent a man is, the more originality he discovers in men.
Ordinary people see no difference between men. —Pascal
* There is as much difference between us and ourselves as between us and others.
—Montaigne
* The health of an environmental system is directly proportionate to its diversity.
—An Axiom in Ecology
* It is only to the individual that a soul is given. —Albert Einstein
286

GUA 39, JIAN3, IMPASSE
 
  Binary 001 010 = 10; Gen below, Kan above
39.X, Overall Image
Over the mountain is water
Impasse
The noble young one, accordingly,
turns bodily around to work on character
Storms drench the highlands. The mountain pass is closed and all plans to cross it
are a washout today. Predictability fails. This day’s journey is over by noon. There
is no problem to solve here, unless it’s how best to give up going forward for now,
or how and where best to weather this storm. Progress depends on retracing the last
few steps. Dead ends will permit some rethinking, as the journey replaces the goal.
The last thing you may want to hear now is that this will help you build character,
but you have extra energy now and you do need to broaden your old frame of mind.
There isn’t a reason why this has happened to you, so make one up back at the inn.
39.0, Impasse
Worthwhile west to south
Not worthwhile east to north
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
Persistence is opportune
If the way you go is not the wrong way, then at least it is at the wrong time. Ahead,
things are cold and wet, dangerous, lonely and steep. You might still need to travel
northeast, but first the detour will take you southwest, maybe straight back to those
moderate midlands and the inn that you recently passed when still on the way to bad
news. It might be that the sage is already there, with his outlook already improving
and having a truly great time. This is only a drawback in one direction. It is going
forward in others. You could now make some personal progress, unless of course
there are storms there as well, like grumbling or whining emotional storms. Then
you’d really be stuck here. Going into trouble is not forward progress, even if once
you thought that direction was forth. Minds are just made to be changed, and most
of the roads around here can be traveled both ways. Sometimes even humankind’s
next great steps forward will be in a backwards direction. And sometimes remaking
ourselves to fit the places we come to beats remaking those places to suit what we
think we want. Character work is more fruitful than changing the climate or weather.
287

39.M, Key Words
Impediment, delay, detour, complication, inconvenience, drawback, immobility
Hindrance, holdup, barrier, obstruction, obstacle, interruption, discouragement
Discontent, stationary period; convoluted route, reorientation; options narrowing
A closed mountain pass, waiting out the storm; lowering expectations and goals
Redefine goals for achievability; detoured but not  deterred; ability to compensate
Knowing when to stop, consolidate progress to date, rethink directions and plans
39.G, From the Glossary
jian3 (a, an, the) impasse, obstacle, impediment, drawback, setback, obstruction,
difficulty, misfortune, fault, holdup, detour, limp, complication, handicap; (to) go
lame, limp, walk lame, stumble (s, ed ing); (to be) halting, hobbled, proud, arro-
gant, impassable, obstructed, complicated, set back, held up, detained, deterred,
interrupted; defective
39.T, Tuan Zhuan
Impasse
(Means) problems
Risk lies ahead
To perceive the risk and be able to stop
(Is) wisdom indeed!
Impasse (is) worthwhile west