pattern o
f
ten spheres (see Dimensions, Fig. 39). Wu, or No-thing, had been used by Daoists
since Laozi to describe the highest stateless state (i.e. ecstasy, derived from out-
of-stasis). The spheres, from the bottom, were a) Xuan pin zhi men; the gate of the
mysterious feminine, b) Lian jing hua qi; lian qi hua shen : refining essence,
transforming to vital force; refining vital force, transforming to spirit, c) Wu q i
chao yuan: the five forces (the agents animated) rising above the source. This is a
modified wu xing mandala, earth center, fire NW, water NE, wood SW & metal SE,
and an unexplained circle at S for the source, d) Chu kan tian li; taking from Kan,
adding to Li, in a proto-Taijitu of three concentric circles alternating half-black
and half-white, and e) Xu, void. This map found its way to Zhou Dunyi (1017-
1073) who re-labeled the spheres within a new diagram called the Taijitu (see
Dimensions, Fig. 40), reading again from the bottom thus: a) Wan w u hua sheng;
evolving life of the myriad beings, b) (on the left of the sphere) Qian dao cheng
nan, (on the right) Kun dao cheng nu ; Qian’s way completes the male, Kun’s
way completes the female, c) the same as c above, d) (on the left) Yang dong ,
(right) Yin jing; Yang in motion, Yin at rest, and e) Wu ji er tai ji : the ultimate no-
thing-ness and yet the supreme ultimate. The similarities of these two diagrams to
the Qabalah’s Tree of Life are glaring or striking enough to suggest an historical
connection, from China towards the West, and the most likely candidates for this
transmission, knowing their inclinations, would be the Sufis, who traveled t
he
world from China to Spain and advised to “s eek wisdom, even in China.” This is
an hypothesis which I have not seen discussed anywhere, but several routes of
transmission existed. The Arabs had brought paper technology from China in the
8th century. Chinese alchemy made its way in Arab hands through the Middle
East to Europe a few centuries later. Colonies of Jews had settled in China by the
9th century. Our communication with China did not begin with Marco Polo.
524

Chickens first came from Vietnam. But the Tree of Life, not drawn in its present
form until 1652, would have adapted itself to the verbal descriptions found in the
much older Sefer Yetzirah, the Book of Formation (est. 3rd to 6th cent. CE), rather
than adopting Song metaphysical speculation. Zhou Dunyi also developed a
similar approach to this map-ladder: from the top down, it described the order of
creation, from the bottom up, it described an ethical path or a path of personal
evolution. Unlike Shao Yong, Zhou Dunyi used the Wu Xing  more than the Ba
Gua. The Liang Yi, or the Two Powers, were primary in both.
The philosophies of Shao Yong, who wrote the Huangji jingshi shu , or the
Supreme Principles Governing the World, and Zhou Dunyi, who wrote the Taijitu
shuo, or an Explanation of the Diagram of the Supreme Ultimate, and Tongshu, or
Penetrating the Book (of Changes), marked the beginning of the Song dynasty
school known as Dao Xue Jia , or the School of the Study of the Dao, or better
known today as N eo-Confucianism. This school actually had three major trends.
The first was structural, the Xiang S hu trend discussed above, which was never
made a great deal more elaborate than it had been. This would form the skeletal
structure of much of Song dynasty thought, although very often this formality
would be explicitly de-emphasized. The second continued the Yi Li  trend, the
term coined by Song scholars for the emphasis on meaning and principle, words
which ultimately referred to ethics. This was well exemplified in the thoughts of
Cheng Yi (1033-1107) who wrote the Yichuan Yizhuan, and his older brother
Cheng Hao (1032-1085). Ouyang Xiu (1007-1072) started a little earlier, writing
the Yi dongzi wen , and was the first to call Confucian authorship o
f the Wings
into question.
This new Yi Li trend was marked by its own eclectic blend of Confuciani