; (a pun)
29.T, Tuan Zhuan
Repeated exposure
(Means) twice the risk
The water replenishes but does not pile up
Making progress (through) risk yet never losing its confidence
To keep the heart secure (is) fulfillment:
When making use of the firmness within
Progress will be valued:
To continue on will be an accomplishment
Heavenly hazards do not permit climbing
Earthly hazards (are) mountains (and) rivers, hills (and) heights
Sovereigns (and) patriarchs arrange hazards in order to protect their domains
Risk’s timely application (is) very important here!
228

29.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.1: not going past the courtyard door, no blame)
Twice the exposure
Going into the canyon’s inner recesses
Foreboding
29.1x Twice the exposure going into the canyon:
To lose the way (is) foreboding
Accustomed to life in the deep, habituated to troubles, he begins to feel at home here,
only dimly recalling a time his life was not lived on an edge. He may get the bright
idea that being careless is the new way to flirt with danger. To go still further down,
into the inner recesses of the pit down in the canyon is truly a challenging venture.
While the canyon might not protect him from rescue, getting lost where none with
any sense go might provide such an insurance. A pit is a dead end, a grave situation.
A pit is a trap, not a path, you cannot follow it through; it is a niche, but the wrong
one to live in. Too deep can be just as bad as too high, or too far out or gone. Now
to risk or gamble a life is a way to savor life, and a way out of mediocrity. But when
it fails to work out as planned, our gene pool works more of this out of the system.
29.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.2: joining with them comes from within, commit)
The canyon holds risks
Seek modest gains
29.2x Seek modest gains:
(One is) not yet out of the middle
Were the abyss to take an interest in him, bring him his meals, or sing him to sleep,
or save him somehow from his own overreaching, it couldn’t be the abyss anymore.
It is free of all such cares and will leave all choices related to care to the small, living
things it envelops. The young ones must learn about danger, why certain leaps are
seldom successful, why they want to keep going one well -grasped hold at a time,
with little successive successes, until they come out on top. Alone within the abyss,
however, there is a friend to be found, in the echoes of our own struggles. In these
we seek an encouragement to keep making encouraging noises. Splat is such a sad,
lonesome sound when none are around to hear it. Collect all of your various selves
and wits and hold them together. Eschew leaps of faith and jumps to conclusions.
229

29.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.3: well cleaned but nothing consumed, show ruler)
Coming and going, canyon after canyon
The narrow ledges are also headrests
Going into the canyon’s inner recesses
Is not at all useful
29.3x Coming (and) going, canyon (after) canyon:
In the end, not much (is) accomplished
Halfway up the canyon wall, with abysses above and below, he finds a well-placed
ledge. A long pause now would refresh our exhausted climber. His breathing has
grown erratic, his heart is not pounding in rapture, his fingers grope more in alarm
than with skill. This state does not conduce to survival, only to changing his noble
self into a blot down at the bottom and a fading echo up at the top. Then all of the
happy, encouraging echoes would cease. This should n ot be a struggle: we do not
want to struggle with rocks the size of cliffs. Good nichemanship should be a skill
and tool of the climber, to find a good place and to own it. Perhaps the ledge will go
sideways: after all most of them do. What a perfect place to put a stone couch and
rock pillow! And what sense to breathe deeply, get bearings and enjoy a great view!
29.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 47: Kun, Exhaustion
(Fan Yao 47.4: grave approach, oppressed in a gilded chariot)
A jug of wine, a baske