rd, Zhi Gua 07: Shi, The Militia
(Fan Yao 07.3: militia likely to transport fatalities, misfortune)
Advancing upon an empty town
46.3x Advancing upon an empty town:
(This is) no place for doubts
This certainly seems too good to be true, and maybe a lot like a trap, or what’s left
of a plague. He and his boldness will have at least one awkward moment this day.
In getting to this position, errors of course have been made, and these w ill tend to
make caution a part of believing in luck. The boldness which he must use now, or
lose, is not some trait he’ll get to use often, but this is a chance to either take firmly
in hand or let it slip from his grasp. And let him not ponder long: once rumored, this
big chance is gone. Appropriate now has two meanings, and they’ll pull him in both
directions. The limits here are not obstacles, but of imagination and nerve. Progress
here is so easy he feels he is missing some steps. Is this lack of challenge so bad?
Perfect the claim first. There’ll always be the challenge of becoming worthy enough.
46.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua* 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.4: a hunt without game)
The sovereign makes offerings at Split Mountain*
Opportune
Making no mistakes
46.4x The sovereign makes offerings at Split Mountain:
Accepting service
He has lived the life of a simple climber and he climbs when his heart says to do so.
His fingers and toes are at home in the cracks in the stone. He only wants to better
the person he was last week. Distinction is not on his mind. But a rumor now says
this has made him the best in the realm. And therefore he takes a call from the king
to bear the latest sacrifice all the way up to the sacred peak. His fortune is deserved.
He began with the basics and ascended from there, with a true dedication, one step
at a time. Honor, much like happiness, does not need to be a goal. Maybe these are
not meant to be goals, but serve us best as consequents, reaffirming our true paths.
To seek honor first might be more than backwards,  if eyes on the prize are not on
the climb as well. His purpose can now take another step up, if it can rise above this.
332

46.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 48: Jing, The Well
(Fan Yao 48.5: the well has a clear, cold spring to drink from)
Persistence is promising
Advance is by steps
46.5x Persistence (is) promising (in) advancing by steps:
A well-earned objective
Each of the steps that he takes now, as he makes his way towards the top, might still
take a similar effort. But each step now seems richer with meaning as the aims are
nearly fulfilled. The toehold has more implications at the edge of the cliff or a shaft
than it does in our steps on the road to the market. It might be enough to make one
giddy and heedless. One may want to leap over, skip steps or jump to conclusions.
But the way to success will double up on respect for the steps taken one at a time,
like manageable little bites for the feet. Climbing invests in our energy’s potential.
Each step is a place to rest and hold gains. We build our reputations thus, gaining
the greater access and vistas, as well as more to lose. The local alpine porter paces
himself for the journey, and keeps enough in reserve for various ways back down.
46.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.6: not serving sovereign or noble, higher worth)
Blind ascent
Advantage in not relaxing that resolve
46.6x Blind ascent to the top:
Expending instead of accruing
He drives himself hard in his climbing. This ascent has been done in the daylight,
but at night his ambition is literally blind. The extraneous thoughts and perceptions
are shed up here as useless weight, and what survives this ordeal will no doubt be fit,
and tested right at the edge. How far life can move up is not a known quantity yet,
and this will drive life up, into these altered states. Sometimes a whole new being or
species is only one of its steps. But the rapture and challenge of such an exaltation
will carry no heavy old goals. And perhaps some things will need