the inner court and the highest of
the noble households, would go a long way towards explaining the broader
subject matter the Zhouyi seems to try to encompass. In any event, any theory of
author intent should address the existence of a much broader scope of subject
matter than would be the primary focus of the king, whether sacrifice obsessed or
not. The modernists avoid this dilemma by reinserting more specific and restricted
subject matter wherever they can, and would be happiest if they could refer all
subjects back to Shang oracle bone topics and fence it all within the fields of
divination and sacrifice. But there are far too many metaphors here, covering too
enormous a range within the broader human life experience. It is this grand scope
of topics that has me suggesting that the book is, in part, also a manual for the
education and training of "young nobility," which was the original meaning of
the term Junzi, long before it came to be misunderstood as "the Superior Man."
The notion of divination may be analyzed along different axes. The most
common, obviously, is the fortune-telling axis or fate vs. free will question, where
the question in the end becomes: What is the point of living? What is the point of
gaining this knowledge and insight, and practicing wisdom and justice, if you
cannot change anything? Or is it really all about the Stoic's learning to accept
Fate with more dignity and less anxiety? The paradox inherent in the common
understanding of divination is usually ignored in these explanations: Isn't the
whole point to be able to avert the bad pronouncements and to capitalize on the
good ones? And what makes people assume that the authors did not know this
when they stared at it on a daily basis?
If the method simply provides a road and weather rep ort, this question
remains: How does it respond? I am not going to get anywhere near this inquiry
(in fact this whole section is
 simply about scoping the questions). Divination, as
understood here, describes the landscape, both the surroundings and what lies a
short way ahead. The axis of orientation is past into future. The prognostication is
a map of where you stand, complete with forks in the road, reports of brigands in
the canyon, the time of day and the color of the clouds. If you must make the
journey this may help you adapt. When the situation is vastly bigger than we are,
and it is presenting itself in a certain typical pattern, then what can be changed
most handily is our response to it. In this response lies choice. And that is what
the advice would be about: adopting the optimum attitude and making the right
choice. In every statement the Yijing makes, its opposite can at least be im plied.
There is not always a need to discuss both sides of an option. If one approach is
said to be unfortunate then one looks also for clues in the text to the wiser or less
self-destructive approach that is implied here.
If the method is, in effect, a set of funhouse mirrors for the subconscious
projections of the querent, the question then becomes: Why not chicken entrails?
Oftentimes any new perspective other than the one you are stuck in is sufficient
to help one to see things in a new light. But the  Zhouyi  offers a wonderful,
dizzying array of images to reflect upon, accompanied by a divination text,
otherwise referred to as mantic formulae or terminology. These images may be
6

akin to those found on Shang oracle bones or they may be images drawn from
the larger Chinese culture. In the 1920's, beginning with Shchutskii in Russia, the
theory that the  Zhouyi  had been written in two or more distinct layers began to
gain an enthusiastic acceptance in the west. In 1933 Waley made a thesis of it:
"The Book of Changes is an arbitrary amalgam of two quite separate
works: 1) An omen or 'peasant interpretation' text ... and 2) a divination text
probably of later date and certainly of a far more sophisticated nature." (p121)
He further divides omen texts into three cate