hole was made on a scapula (scapulimancy) or the plastron of a
turtle or tortoise shell (plastromancy). The question was formulated and engraved
on the piece, which was then heated until cracks appeared around an initial stress
point. The cracks were then interpreted according to an ever-growing lore of
signs and their meanings. This lore developed as much by failure as by success
since a diviner in the service of royalty (when not the king himself) was account-
able for royal error. Both the shape o
f the signs and the terminology of prognos-
tication, the so-called mantic formula, gradually developed into a system.
The Shang (or Yin) dynasty came to a rapid close within a single generation
when a well-loved and respected Sovereign, Di Yi, was succeeded by a tyrannical
son, Zhou Xin. Over th irty-two years of galling excesses, he lost the Mandate of
Heaven, the divine right of merit to rule. In 1048, at Youli, he imprisoned a noble
of the House of Zhou for political reasons. This nobleman’s name was Ji Chang. It
was during his time in prison that Ji Chang, posthumously known as King Wen,
or Wen Wang, is  said  to have developed a new and easier system of divination
called Yi, a word meaning both easy and changes, using milfoil or yarrow stalks.
The written character for yi also signified the house lizard in China, which was
quick and agile, hard to spot, and to an extent less than the chameleon, changed
color with its context. Perhaps it was also a totem, or a welcome visitor in the cell.
Ji Chang is said to have conceived of, designed and arranged the sixty-four
six-line diagrams, representing all of the possible combinations of a stack of six
lines which were either broken or whole. These diagrams, called Hexagrams or
Gua, are said to be further composed of all of the possible combinations of eight
smaller, three-line diagrams, called Trigrams or Ba Gua. The Ba Gua are said to
have existed prior to this point in history, and even as far back as the Legendary
Period, but no evidence exists to support this claim: they may even have been a
489

later introduction, although, intuitively, an elementary concept would be likely to
have preceded a compound one. The Ba Gua may have begun as a system of
substitute notations for cracks, but by the end of the first century of the Middle
Zhou they had acquired at least two additional sets of meanings: eight properties
of activity and eight kinds of natural phenomena.
The sixty-four Gua, which would come to stand among later followers and
thinkers as a microcosm of all of the possible combinations of everything in the
universe, presented a remarkably rich way of categorizing experiences. Each one,
to its own unique set of properties, began to attract associations. This system of
sixty-four ideas was broad enough to incorporate much of the system of mantic
formulae and prognostications which had already been developing for centuries.
This may have become the first layer of text (which is not to say that other layers
were added at later times). But the system had room for much more. It had room
for little lines from songs and verses, bits of folk wisdom, ethical advice, proverbs,
folklore, farming forecasts, historical anecdotes, peasant omen interpretations,
political maxims, military strategies, advice to the lovelorn, and insights gleaned
from observation of nature and its creatures. It became first a repository, and then
a source, for concepts and ideas. It became a medley, an anthology of succinct
expressions of the wisdom of the entire culture. It was a system made to grow by
association. And yet, because it was a system meant to be tested in divination, as
a working handbook for a school of diviners who assisted royalty with important
decisions, it was also made to be cut back or pruned according to the harder facts
of life, whenever it failed to work. The diviners at the royal court still had strong
incentives to be accurate.
Because of this accretion and incorporation of older ma