stion by analogy is our potential enrichment, not
fallacy. Take a look at twentieth century Western numerology. You use it to add
up the letters of your name or the numbers of your birth date and thereby
discover who you are. The believers in this never seem to question the fact that
the letters and order of the alphabet, and the dates of the chosen calendar, are
purely arbitrary constructs, which their believers are in danger of becoming
themselves. Most believers in astrology, to take another example, will use this
discipline to further delimit which one-twelfth of the possibilities they fit within,
rather than using what they can learn here for expanding and developing all
twelve ideas within the range. Astrologers , on the other hand, have a jump on this
insight in having to learn to speak to all twelve. There are reasons why we can
categorize our reality into twelve parts, but these are human reasons, not cosmic
ones. And the why to these reasons is ultimately connected to our need for
knowhow, scientes in Latin, the root of science. The Xiang S hu Xue was
extremely primitive, as science goes. Joseph Needham called these scholars a big
setback to sci ence, and Mutationists . These were young children with building
blocks, not so unlike the quantum and astrophysicists of today, and their
playground was largely a tautological (self-defined) reality structure, in which
they deduced conclusions about reality from a finite set of very theoretical, and
often fantastic, premises and postulates. When reality contradicted the theory,
portions of it had to be ignored or lopped off, just like Procrustes lopped off the
feet of his clients so that they could better fit into the fine beds he had made for
them. Xiang S hu is a maze, an amazing thing, and it can easily become a trap. It
would be easy to spend a whole lifetime exploring the properties of binary
systems, of which the Yi is a subset, all the while thinking you are still on the
subject of Yixue . Purely imaginary places can be mapped with math and
geometry and made into real and true dimensions by definition. But this does not
make the exercise relevant or make the place mapped a place worth going. Xiang
Shu has its place in Yixue, but it helps to know when to stop.
The Early Han saw the development of two “auguristic” Xiang S hu streams
of
 metaphysical argument based on analogy. The first was called Cai Y i, which
used the relationship between symbols and sociopolitical and natural phenomena
(especially disasters) to predict specific events. The second was called Gua Q i,
which concentrated on cyclic patterns of symbols (especially intricate calendars)
and their relationship to events. In both cases, their symbolic correspondences
were seen as physically and metaphysically causal rather than simply linguistic.
The Gua Qi was the more over-elaborated (and pointless) of the two, but both
streams lost focus and substance, and the reason for what they were doing. A
similar “fate” fell on western Astrology, which failed to heed the words of one of
its founders, Aratos (3rd cent. 
BCE): “The astrological zodiac was not founded on
the stars, but on symbolic motifs of our inner nature”.
The Xiao Xiang  section discusses number and scale a little further, and then
develops the first fourteen Xiang or Images. The Dimensions section will discuss
and chart a fair number of structural dimensions of the Yi. Several of the Xiang
519

Shu or “Han” dim ensions were mer ely Han dynasty inventions, some of them
were elaborations upon dim ensions invented in the Wings, some advanced true
Wing rediscoveries, and some were true and original Han rediscoveries.
For a dimension to be in the invention  category does not necessarily negate
its value, especially when it offers an excuse to say something insightful. In this
group fall certain Gua dimensions, such as the Jiao (or Reversed) Gua, twenty-
eight pairs of the Pang Tong (or Opposite) Gua, and the sixteen Hu (or Nuclear)
Gua. The assignment o