lish gloss of a Chinese word would be, or even should be, more than twenty
times as “messy” as a Chinese gloss of an English word. Add to this the fact that
Chinese grammar often uses only context  to define the part of speech of a word,
as well as its tense, gender, voice, mood, plurality, etc. English counterparts must
often stand ready to flip from noun to verb to adjective or adverb on demand.
One begins to see that, to faithfully  render Chinese into English, one must come
very heavily armed with English options. The simple substitution of one word for
another throughout will not work (nouns such as dragon or tiger excepted). The
Old Chinese language is far richer in connotation and multiple meanings, as the
English language is in definition. Chinese is thus a better language for poetry and
evocativeness, as English is for science and being specific.
Take for example the character Li2 (3902, 23f, 172+11), the Gua Ming or
Hexagram Name of the 30th emblem. Radical 172 is Z hui1, meaning short-tailed
birds. One of the ancient meanings of Li2 is indeed “oriole,” and since this is
discoverable in various ancient texts, it is often to modernists the only legitimate
24

meaning, to which the interpretation of the whole of the Hexagram text must be
referred. So how and when did it come to have the meanings “to leave, depart,
radiate or stand out from? Anyone who has actually looked out their window on
an early spring or late fall day and seen one of these birds in the gray-brown
vegetation would have no problem at all understanding that the meanings arose
at the same time. The startling contrast in the figure-ground relationship would
immediately make this bird a symbol of contrast itself, of standing out or forth, the
very roots of our word “existence.” The bigger idea was already implicit when
the character was first assigned to the bird.
But this breadth presents problems in translation. There will be a broad
tendency for an English translation to be too narrow or specific. There really is no
way around this except to a) translate with those English words which are either
more vague or have a broader range of meanings or b) translate in more than a
single dimension and give several optional English words at once to better cover
the range of meanings, as I have attempted to do in the Matrix translation. It will
not always be possible to clearly convey the interpretation that makes the most
sense in a literal translation. It may narrow the reading too much, or it may require
too many extra words to explain the entendres and innuendoes. Much of this can
only be done in a free translation, which I will not do, or in a commentary, which I
have kept separate. Sometimes one cannot help but spin the translation to bring
out the most important implication, but only to lose others which are also implied.
We can certainly inflect Chinese better in English translation than vice versa. But
alas, we are also required to do this by the much greater specificity of English.
Broadening the glosses is needed to compensate for this. Further, it is im portant
to keep the meanings as broad (or at least as versatile) as possible for divination
purposes: I have not found a Chinese Zhouyi text that I can call meaningless,
even standing alone, but it is intended that these broader statements take on more
specific meanings when they are interpreted in the light of a specific question
being asked. This is where most of the narrowing and specification of
 meanings
should occur - this should not be the decision of the translator. Bear in mind that
the text of the oracle is intended to evoke, not to pin down; to suggest, not to
predetermine. If it even attempted to do the latter, the book would need to grow
lengthy enough to micro-manage the whole of human existence.
There are reasons to be cautious about greater breadth, though. Even with
the broader glosses generally advised, there are places where words and phrases
might be quite specific and yet vary wi