ood books has no advantage over the man who can't
read them. —Mark Twain
310

GUA 43, GUAI4, DECISIVENESS
 
  Binary 111 110 = 62; Qian below, Dui above
43.X, Overall Image
The lake rises into the sky
Decisiveness
The noble young one, accordingly,
Dispenses favor to reach those below
Resting on virtue is thereby avoided
The lake is as full of itself as it gets. Whether had or made too much of, some of the
surcharge or surfeit must go, right over the top and away. This niche is simply not
big enough. This might be a cherished illusion, some nasty old habit, the next in a
long line of last weaknesses, a thing that we thought we would want more, a thing
we have now had enough of. Whatever it is, it is tempting to reason against it with
passion, instead of just getting it wrapped up and letting it go. This is the best time
to move on a little more lightly: the sage surrenders his wisdom, the magus his book
of spells. The young noble makes less of h imself, not taking this all so personally.
43.0, Decisiveness
A disclosure at the royal court
A truthful appeal
This will be serious
Inform the home town
Nothing worthwhile in resorting to hostilities
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
When we learn that something or someone among us must go, we do not then need
to work ourselves into a frenzy or froth. Character and dignity should provide all of
the force that we’ll need. We do not need not to hate a thing first in order to set it
aside. Troubles are most effectively banished by clear definition, not by obsessive
behavior. Our wiser wizards will tell us that even those devils and demons are best
brought under control by speaking their proper names. This is nothing mysterious.
To understand where things begin and end is great power. To set yourself against
a thing might exalt it or make you its victim. Credulity gives it weight, aggression
gives it force, gossip gives it a voice and vagueness lends it a wit.  Just a simple no
will often suffice, or else high, truthful words at court, to get our unspeakable things
truthfully named and back into proper perspective - and the rest of life pointed back
in its proper dir ection. Until then we are not rational beings. Some resolutions are
made with great force and commitment, but the word refers also to a crisp and clear
light, and to putting things where they belong. These two don’t need all that force.
311

 43.M, Key Words
Satiety, surfeit, having enough, finality, giving notice, parting verdicts and words
Break off, conclude, uproot, expel, purge, express, denounce, renounce, condemn
Discharge, remove corruption, vent, clean house, make a clean breast, outpouring
Resolution, resolve, determination, commitment, single-mindedness, obsession
Inclination to exaggeration, hyperbole, protesting too much; over the top; unload
Indictment, disclosure, conviction, exposé, diagnostic; decisiveness, breakthrough
43.G, From the Glossary
guai4 (to be) decisive, resolute, certain, committed, resolved, decided, serious,
determined; (to) determine, decide, resolve, commit (to), indict, execute, cut off,
censure, displace, purge, uproot, eradicate, divide, part ways, make a breach (s,
ed, ing); (a, the) disclosure, resolution, decision (to), decisiveness, satiety; cer-
tainly, seriously, decisively, resolutely,
43.T, Tuan Zhuan
Decisiveness
(Means) to break through
The firm breaks through the flexible
Dynamic but also persuasive
Breaking through and yet responsive
A disclosure at the royal court:
The flexible rides upon five firm (lines)
A truthful appeal, this will be serious:
This crisis will then be made known
Inform the home town,
Nothing worthwhile (in) resorting to hostilities:
What is valued (would) then be wasted
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
Firmness endures and then completes
312

43.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 28: Da Guo, Greatness in Excess
(Fan Yao 28.1: cushioning with white mats, make no mistakes)
Vigorous in advancing the toes
Going forward is less than successful
Mistakes will be made
43.1x Wit