mers and the locals are stunned. The water is so clear and clean that
the frogs get edgy and leave. It also explains all those old prayer beads they found,
with glyphs of the dead being brought back to life. There can be no question now:
if this is about someone’s life, some difficult times might well be over. The water,
the anima mundi, will be there to refresh and serve all who’ll remember it’s there.
48.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 57: Xun, Adaptation
(Fan Yao 57.6: subtleties under the bed, losing valuables, axe)
As the well comes in, do not cover
Being true is most promising
48.6x Outstanding promise at the top:
A great outcome
He thinks to dig a small well for himself, so he calls in a stranger to divine the right
place. The well has come in, and then some. Now his big problem is keeping the lid
on his well from floating away. He will need no rope or bucket. He has already built
several duck ponds. The neighbors take what they can. But still he has a small brook
left over. The thing just keeps refilling itself and the water just keeps getting cleaner.
There are times in this life when giving freely isn’t just charity, when indiscriminate
might be appropriate, when closure might not be a good thing, when compassion for
all living things needs to be spread around. The well does not choose: it will serve a
sage or a tyrant, a resident or a wanderer, peasants and sovereigns alike. To keep the
lid on will only detract from the taste. We wish you well. Now give yourself away.
345

48, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 21, Shi He, Biting Through
qian gua (inverse): 47, Kun, Exhaustion
jiao gua (reverse): 59, Huan, Scattering
hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
48, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Hod in Briah
* Tarot: Eight of Cups
* Astrology: Mercury in Water
48, Quotations
* The gods help them who help themselves. —Aesop
* Enough is as good as a feast. —Joshua Sylvester
* It never occurs to fools that merit and good fortune are closely united.
—Goethe
* Mahomet called the hill to come to him again and again; and when it stood still,
he was never a whit abashed, but said, “If the hill will not come to Mahomet,
Mahomet will go to the hill.” —quoted by Francis Bacon, “Boldness”
* The well of Providence is deep. It’s the buckets we bring to it that are small.
 —Mary Webb
* Everything I am  /  I draw from you
Battered old bucket  /  Dipping in your well. —Rumi
* Lessons are not given. They are taken. —Cesare Pavese
* Fortunate indeed is the man who takes exactly the right measure of himself,
and holds a just balance between what he can acquire and what he can use.
—Peter Mere Latham
346

GUA 49, GE2, SEASONAL CHANGE
 
  Binary 101 110 = 46; Li below, Dui above
49.X, Overall Image
There is fire in the lake
Seasonal change
The noble young one, accordingly,
organizes the calendar and clarifies the time
The noonday flame of the summer solstice sun penetrates deep in the lake, warming
the water and setting the changes in motion. The next season comes upon us, just as
we have begun to adapt to the last one. Time turns this world around, in continuous
revolution, but succession proceeds in discernible stages. The turning of planets and
stars will come first. Seasons lag six weeks behind, as the mass of this earth warms
up and cools off more slowly. This might leave the unknowing always behind the
times and looking for clues as to why things are changing so strangely. Clarification
of time can help us to get ahead of ourselves, and sometimes caught up to the world.
49.0, Seasonal Change
Complete the day and then be sure
Supreme fulfillment is worth persistence
Regrets pass
It begins to grow uncomfortably warm inside last winter’s coat. The old is finished
with its day: last season’s pelts, callused old hides, cocoons and even great nations.
Security in changing times is to know how securely time changes, knowing where
the world has gone by learning how to read the signs. The clockworks of heaven is
no toy to