eign Gua, 9th Moon (Oct) 
 
23, Notes  
* 23.1,2 The addition of such points to an ambiguity: your persistence or theirs? 
* 23.5 This seems to be a lost historical reference to a popular uprising against  
abuse of class privilege. The noble family in question would have been spared a  
“toppling” specifically because of the proper way the subordinates in their employ  
had been treated. The Yi is of course advocating here for noblesse oblige , nobility’s  
sense of obligation to the society which supports it. 
*  23.6 See Sappho, Fr. 105a. 
* 23.6 This is seen frequently in the modern era, in the looting and burning of a  
ghetto or slum by its own inhabitants, who seem to be heedless at the time that the  
greatest loss is their own. There is no other leader but rage, which, in its blind- 
ness, misses its object. A tantrum is not a revolution: the fruit falls on its own,  
once again into fertile soil. Those adapted to prosper will begin with the facts. 
 
23, Wai Guang  
* Qabalah: Kether in Assiah 
* Tarot : Ace of Pentacles 
* Astrology: Saturn in Earth 
 
23, Quotations 
* There are people who are followed all through their lives by a beggar to whom  
they have given nothing. —Karl Kraus 
* Et tu, Brute? —Julius Caesar 
* Concession comes with better grace and more salutary effect from superior  
power. —William Pitt 
* In history the way of annihilation is invariably prepared by inward degener- 
ation, by decrease of life. Only then can a shock from outside put an end to the  
whole of it. —Jakob Burckhardt 
* Know ye the delight which rolleth stones into precipitous depths?  Him whom  
ye cannot teach to fly, teach him then to fall faster. —Nietzsche, TSZ 
* You, making haste, haste on decay: not blameworthy  /  life is 
good be it stubbornly long or suddenly 
A mortal splendor:  meteors are not needed less than 
mountains:  shine, perishing republic. —Robinson Jeffers 
* Growth for the sake of growth is the ideology of the cancer cell.  
—Edward Abbey 
196

GUA 24, FU4, RETURNING
 
  Binary 100 000 = 32; Zhen below, Kun above
24.X, Overall Image
Thunder dwells within the earth
To return
The early sovereigns, accordingly, on the day of winter solstice,
closed the frontier pass gates
Merchants and travelers did not move about
Rulers did not inspect the domains
The longest night at last ends in dawn, the great wheel again spins towards spring.
Locked in winter’s frost the frozen seed abides, a conception, but a long way from
birth. Winter begins today, but the bottom of this cold lags six weeks behind, on
the near side of hope for the best, and spring’s promises kept. The change will not
be abrupt, but trust in the wheel’s direction suggests it is on an acceptable course.
In such deep cold and dark night there is no wiser choice to make than for refuge
and home: light and the fire go indoors as well. Why are these the high holy days?
Why not spring in full blossom or glorious sum mer? Take a full winter to answer.
24.0, Returning
Fulfillment
Exit and enter without anxiety
Companions arrive without fail
Turning around and returning is the way
The seventh day brings return
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
New life begins deep inside, in those places too near to know and too small to see.
But the mind sometimes seems made to go out and about, to test and discard new
truths and realities. Now and again the mind will need a reminding, a memory wants
a remembering, the vision a revision, the cognition a recognition. We cannot face the
new without a renewal. Out there and way out there are where we leave those things
that we will not or cannot bring home. The best and most realistic of all long-term
goals is a home, and the longest-term home of them all is the earth. Of every being
and thing that has ever existed, one thing can surely be said: this was only a phase
that some of this world went through, although sometimes again and again. When
nearly the same things happen again and again, then and there we find our reasons