Lines, are geometrically expressible on the
Xian Tian Ba Gong grid. As with the Yao Wei, there is no explicit reference to the Yao De
set of dimensions in the Zhouyi text. But, unlike Line Positions, there is very little in terms
of vocabulary usage to validate any of the Line Characteristics as true Zhouyi dimensions.
Statistical analysis, even of relative optimism in prognostication, does not support any use of
these prior to the Wings. One would, for instance, expect the Lines in their Appropriate
Positions to be described a little more cheerfully than those considered “out of place.” This
is not the case, and this is obscured by the fact that the Wings, especially in the Xiao Xiang,
point only to the occurrences where pointing is useful. There is nothing in the Zhouyi
outside of chance probability which cannot be explained by a simpler combination of Yao
Wei, Zhi Gua , Fan Y ao and (the still-embryonic) Ban Xiang  dimensions. The want of
congruity between the Zhouyi text and the performance of these dimensions in analysis is
normally ascribed to the vagaries of “The Time,” a truly nebulous dimension which takes
the place of a suspicion that the Yao De do not explain the use of the words and metaphors
in the text.
The Wings’ authors reveal little or no comprehension of the Zhi G ua or the Fan
Yao dimensions. In many obvious cases, the fact of their being overlooked for so long is
striking. Absent these tools, the Wings’ school of commentators became quite creative (and
often insightful) in the construction of their new sets of interpretive methods. And,
consequently, these several Yao De dimensions are very important to an understanding of
the Wings themselves, even while confusing the corresponding Yao Ci interpretation.
Worthy of note here is that the terms Rou
 and Gang, Flexible and Firm, do not
appear in the Zhouyi. Neither does Yang, and Yin is used only in its ancient sense of shade
or shadow. These pairs make their first appearances in the Ten Wings.
Zhong or Centrality. Any Line, whether Rou or Gang, is said to be Central or In Balance if
it occupies the middle of either the Lower or Upper Trigrams, i.e., if it occupies Line 2 or 5.
This is supposed to account for the statistically good auspice of these Lines and for the
corresponding warnings given to the less balanced Lines 3 and 6. But bear in mind that
balance or equilibrium is usually a good idea, and always safe advice. (Assuming a choice
between static and dynamic balance, according to the time: one wanteth not “static” when
the Tiger giveth chase).
Dang or Appropriateness. A Broken or Rou Line is called Appropriate or Suited in th
e
even-numbered Line Positions (2, 4 & 6), a Whole or Gang Line in the Odd (1, 3 & 5).
However, Wang Bi observes that, in the Wings’ Xiao Xiang, wei b u dang (the position is
not appropriate) is not used at all for the 1st 6 and that the concept is only used
inappropriately for the gang lines at 01.6wy.a ( gui er wu wei ) and at 05.6x (sui bu dang
wei), indicating that the dimension of appropriateness is not applicable to Lines 1 & 6 (see
Lynn, p. 32-33). Gua 63, Already Complete, is completely Dang and Gua 64, Not Yet
Complete, is completely Bu (Not) Dang. (The titles might be as easily explained by the
relationships of Fire to Water).
28

Zheng or Correctness is a subset of Dang, reserved for use (in this sense) at 9 5th.
Ying or Resonance. Lines in analogous places in the upper and lower Ba Gua, i.e. the line
pairs 1-4, 2-5, and 3-6, where one is Rou and the other Gang, are said to resonate, correlate
or correspond. Wang Bi (tr. Lynn, p. 29-30) observes that: “Resonance provides an image
of shared purpose ... . Thus the fact that, although distant, a line indicates that one can make
a move is due to its having acquired a resonant partner.” The Eight Gua which are
composed of Trigrams paired with their Opposites (see Fig. 24) are fully Ying. The Chong
(Repeated) (Ba) Gua (see Fig. 23) are completely Bu (Not) Ying.
Fen or Even A