resents the superfluous
And applauds the modest
Authenticity ennobles and exemplifies
(Being) lowly and yet not easy to exceed
The noble young one has results
144

15.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.1: in flight, drag wing, fast, but go somewhere)
Authentic modesty in the noble young one
Is useful in crossing great streams
Promising
15.1x (The) authentic modesty (of) the noble young one:
Humility (is) a means to self-mastery
He appears to be nothing special. He does not look or speak like a noble, does not
look or speak like a beggar. He might not be suspected of harboring one thought,
much less a boat and big plans to cross the great stream. This might not be known
even after he’s gone. It is not that he has no light to spare, but that he has it invested,
with no light to squander. Nearly invisible, yet not seeming mysterious, he keeps to
himself and attracts no distractions or challenge, simply doing the work that needs
being done and pacing himself for the journey ahead. Modesty here is his method,
made to serve greater ambitions. Quiet competence and humble simplicity will take
him from this shore to highest adventure. So is a big plan to cross the great stream
then immodest? Yes, if he fails to make it. He will not know this until he’s across.
15.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.2: sincerity precedes the reward in spring sacrifice)
Expressing modesty
Persistence is promising
15.2x Expressing modesty, persistence (is) promising:
The inner affections (are) found
If you don’t tell them you’re modest, then how will they ever know? And since they
will not read your mind, express your skills, your needs, your desires, your want of
an opportunity and your worthiness to take it. An honest modesty, straight from the
heart, can feel great about itself. Doors open for virtuous ones and good information
can open those doors. Sometimes being appreciated will help both the cause and its
outcomes. The cultivation of virtue is often a long and thankless task, so why not see
some rewards  here? Modesty is not self-effacement, nor shame in being imperfect.
It might be announced, or even decreed, without inviting a fall. Outward signs and
behavior are not disallowed. The wrongheaded sort of humility that berates itself in
court is just a perverse form of vainglory. To silence modesty is to confuse the two.
145

15.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.3: restraint in display is suited to persistence)
Diligent modesty in the noble young one
Gets results
Promising
15.3x (The) diligent modesty (of) the noble young one:
The myriads of people concur
Industrial strength modesty. His dedication and competence are inspiring of awe,
but he got this way by being modest and attending to what was real. He is good at
what he does and he has no doubts about this. Now, as the work begins to see some
rewards, people gather around with compliments and praise. But he sends them on
errands and starts them on projects, too busy to dwell on the honors, and applies the
energy saved by not doing what is not needed. Does this mean that the work is not
done for reward? He must be concealing some happiness, or smiling a little inside.
Maybe it means that the work is simply not done and greater enjoyment is already
had in its doing. It’s the same thing as not speaking out when your silence allows
you to listen and learn: it’s as far from done as from wisdom, but working on it still.
15.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness In Excess
(Fan Yao 62.4: not beyond greeting others, and heedfulness)
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
With candid authenticity
15.4x Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
(With) candid authenticity:
(This is) not against the rules
If it is best not to err, is it then second best to err on caution’s side? Or is it best to
step forward with candor and boldness? If you step forward and tell it just like it is,
might you not learn a bit sooner whether or not you were wrong? When t