is court, came to the
weavers; and the rogues raised their arms, as if in the act of holding something up,
saying, "Here are your Majesty's trousers! Here is the scarf! Here is the mantle!
The whole suit is as light as a cobweb; one might fancy one has nothing 
at all on,
when dressed in it; that, however, is the great virtue of this delicate cloth."
"Yes indeed!" said all the courtiers, although not one of them could see
anything of this exquisite manufacture.
"If your Imperial Majesty will be graciously pleased to take off your
clothes, we will fit on the new suit, in front of the looking glass."
The Emperor was accordingly undressed, and the rogues pretended to
array him in his new suit; the Emperor turning round, from side to side, before the
looking glass.
"How splendid his Majesty looks in his new clothes, and how well they
fit!" everyone cried out. "What a design! What colors! These are indeed royal
robes!"
"The canopy which is to be borne over your Majesty, in the procession, is
waiting," announced the chief master of the ceremonies.
"I am quite ready," answered the Emperor. "Do my new clothes fit well?"
asked he, turning himself round again before the looking gla ss, in order that he
might appear to be examining his handsome suit.
The lords of the bedchamber, who were to carry his Majesty's train felt
about on the ground, as if they were lifting up the ends of the mantle; and
543

pretended to be carrying something; for they would by no means betray anything
like simplicity, or unfitness for their office.
So now the Emperor walked under his high canopy in the m idst of the
procession, through the streets of his capital; and all the people standing by, and
those at the windows, cried out, "Oh! How beautiful are our Emperor's new
clothes! What a magnificent train there is to the m antle; and how gracefully the
scarf hangs!" in short, no one would allow that he could not see these much-
admired clothes; because, in doing so, he w ould have declared himself either a
simpleton or unfit for his office. Certainly, none of the Emperor's various suits, had
ever made so great an impression, as these invisible ones.
"But the Emperor has nothing at all on!" said a little child.
"Listen to the voice of innocence!" exclaimed his father; and what the
child had said was whispered from one to another.
"But he has nothing at all on!" at last cried out all the people. The Emperor
was vexed, for he knew that the people were right; but he thought the procession
must go on now! And the lords of the bedchamber took greater pains than ever,
to appear holding up a train, although, in reality, there was no train to hold.
Body Ritual Among the Nacirema
by Horace Miner. American Anthropologist  LVIII (1956), 503-7
reprinted by permission of the American Anthropological Association
One of the best examples of the extreme degree to which a culture may be
dominated by ritualized, magical treatments of illness is that of the Nacirema, here
described by Miner. The Nacirema focus considerable attention upon the body,
which is thought to be utterly fulsome to the eye and naturally liable to infirmity.
The result of this belief is an elaborate household shrine complex of charms,
magic, potions and holy ablutions which are intended to prevent physical
debility. Should the household shrine prove inadequate, medical specialists such
as “holy mouth men” and “listeners” may be consulted. Miner’s discussion of
the shock treatments which are accepted and regularly employed in the latipso
ceremony confirms the native’s surpassing faith in what, by modern standards,
must be deemed supernatural, even abhorrent, techniques. The presence of a ritual
torture theme in Nacirema therapy lends the author to suggest the possibility of
sado-masochistic personality structure. Despite the sundry magical elements in
the Nacirema approach to physical ills, it would be a mistake to assume t hese
people are “magic-ridden.” It is principally in the area of sickness and death,
wh