: a precarious but useful arrangement, if this can be maintained.
Too much flame and the water dries up, but with too much water the fire goes out.
Picture such a condition: clarity meets its best challenge, the mind and the world fit
for a time. The setup is done, but only the past remains perfect. Success will never
endure, although care will double its life. Up ahead is the least excitement, a balance
maintained with light touches and no more exciting big swings. The steadiest state is
dynamic, and done is only a point within the process, where things start falling apart.
The birds fly south while the weather is still fine, moving a little ahead of the end.
63.0, Already Complete
Fulfillment is minor
But rewarding to persist
At the beginning, promise; by the end, disorder
The bulk of the work is finished now, the shop is cleaned up and dismantled, helpers
are dismissed. Working on the finishing touches, the fine grit takes longer to polish,
and the last bit of progress is hardest to see. No more big chunks on the floor: we
are down to small shavings and dust. It is time to fuss and fret, or to sell the thing,
or smash it and move on. The work now gets its first coat of wax. Even a rigorous
wisdom allows time for satisfaction, even some pride. But right in the middle of this,
the scratches begin to appear. We’ll guard against what we think are inferior forces,
like a universe bent on entropy. But perfection is an unstable state. The system left
to itself falls apart. The work’s incompleteness was what kept it going; its finishing
starts the decay. The building has turned from verb into noun. The real adventure
is over now. Nostalgia for our vanishing pasts, outlived motives and selves, belongs
to a world already eaten by time. Change is such that perfect or done is only a kind
of fare well. Beauty is sad in this way. Thus are the first of the flaws made part of a
tapestry’s weave, and scattered leaves of fall, the best part of the best kept gardens.
431

63.M, Key Words
Achieving order or perfection, finalizing, wrapping up, follow-up, winding down
Final or finishing touches, loose ends; holding gains against diminishing returns
Completion begins the maintenance, and decay; s afeguarding prior achievements
Epilogue, appendix, anticlimax, segue, afterthought; issues of past and perfection
Momentum in decay; memory, retrospective, reminiscence, nostalgia, hindsight
Final steps of the crossing, culmination, denouement, residuum, losing dynamism
63.G, From the Glossary
ji4 (is/are, has/have) after, already, as long as, at last, entirely, finally, now that,
having, once, since, upon, when (finished, done), while, whilst, (to) have done,
attain, complete, be done with, end, exhaust, finish, get ... done (s, ed, ing); (to be)
completed, consummated, de facto, done, finished, past, fixed, certain; end of
event, particle of perfect tense
ji4 (to be) complete, across, done, finished, accomplished, numerous; stately,
dignified, beautiful, up to standard; of help, assistance; across (a, the) stream,
river; (to) complete, conclude, succeed, finish, fulfill, perfect, achieve, increase,
accomplish, stop, cease, ford, cross; (a, the) river, stream; benefit, assist, aid,
contribute to, help, relieve, save, overcome an obstacle (s, ed, ing); (a, the)
accomplishment, completion, obstacle overcome
63.T, Tuan Zhuan
After completion (comes) fulfillment
The minor is that which fulfills
Worthwhile to persist:
The firm (and) the flexible (are all) correct and also properly placed
At the beginning, promise:
The flexible occupies the center
By the end equilibrium results in disorder
This process (is) finished
432

63.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.1: if going is impassible, coming is respectable)
Braking those wheels
Soaking one’s tail*
No harm done
63.1x Braking those wheels:
Deserving no harm
The driver succeeds in crossing the water and cuts loose his horses to graze on the
farther shore. But in his hurry to rest here, he underachi