with golden ears
And metal grip
Rewarding to persist
50.5x A cauldron (with) golden ears:
In balance in order to effect realities
The cauldron is pleasing and functional, sturdy enough to stand up to the average
fool’s abuse, yet well enough made to serve at the finest occasions. It receives real
food from above and below, sometimes leftover stew and sometimes ambrosia and
manna. It commands respect for its utility and its appearance. So too is the life of
a noble who would help his people transform. He is approachable to his people and
he makes himself accessible, but he keeps enough dignified distance to maintain a
useful respect. The design here is almost complete. Well-balanced will mean bottom
heavy, weighted a little towards practical function. The metal grip will mean that this
must be handled with gloves, but also that it can lift a substantial meal. Someone is
sure to make gloves another step in the ceremony, instead of wrapping the handle.
50.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 32: Heng, Continuity
(Fan Yao 32.6: continuously stimulated, unfortunate)
A cauldron with a jade grip
Very promising
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
50.6x A jade grip across the top:
The firm (and) the flexible (are) in due proportion
The cauldron has a carrying ring fashioned from a fine piece of jade. Sensibility and
sensitivity find common ground in a stylish understatement. A pleasant and useful
presence will combine the best of both worlds. This cauldron will not be abused or
ignored, or carried by random people to random places, or hung up on rusty nails.
Respect can be a part of design. It’s the thing that will make people say: They don’t
make them like they used to. It’s the classical, timeless elements that will set it above
all the fashions and trends, those things which are not made to last. So too with the
sage and his teachings: he may lean more than a little towards the things we have
handed down, and less towards the latest trends that have the new age so excited.
He still wants the new, it’s still about changes, but he wants to use finer ingredients.
357

50, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 03, Zhun, Rallying
qian gua (inverse): 49, Ge, Seasonal Change
jiao gua (reverse): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members
hu gua (nuclear): 43, Guai, Decisiveness
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
50, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Hod in Atziluth
* Tarot: Eight of Wands (Directed change)
* Astrology: Mercury in Fire
50, Quotations
* Abjure the why and seek the how. —The Kasidah, tr R. F. Burton
* The most valuable insights are methods. —Nietzsche
* In this book it is spoken of the Sephiroth, and the paths, of spirits and conjur-
ations, and many other things which may or may not exist. It is immaterial
whether they exist or not. By doing certain things, certain things follow; students
are most earnestly warned against attributing objective reality or philosophical
validity to any of them. —Crowley, Magick in Theory and Practice
* All perception of truth is a perception of an analogy; we reason from our hands
to our heads. —Thoreau
* You are an alchemist; make gold of that. —Pope
* Say nothing, froth not, do not raise the lid of the cauldron;
Simmer well, and be patient, for I am cooking you. —Rumi
* I hold that man is in the right who is most closely in league with the future.
—Henrik Ibsen
358

GUA 51, ZHEN4, AROUSAL
 
  Binary 100 100 = 36; Zhen below, Zhen above; Chong Gua
51.X, Overall Image
Resounding thunder
Arousal
The noble young one makes use of fear and alarm
to adjust and examine
Thunder reverberates through the dark clouds above. Those bound to reflex actions
are moved to much motion by fear. Those who live to learn come to turn fear into
courage and grace, and to sort what reacts from what drives. Wise ones might show
reverence in power’s face, yet sneak up behind it with a bridle in hand. Fear is just
information when it’s not allowed to lead. Thunder’s first peal surprises, but novelty
turns into experience. How can a response be worthy of suc