he latter as a divergent or objective force or sense without.
See Dimensions, under Ban Xiang , The Half Images, and the segment on Zhen and
Hui Gua in the text for each of the Trigrams or Ba Gua below. The second is in the
function of sixteen of the Hexagrams or Gua as Nuclear Hexagrams ( Hu Gua), see
Dimensions, under Hu Gua.
Two Scales of Twenty-Eight appear. The first is in the form of the Qian G ua
or Inverse pairs of the diagrams. See Dimensions, under Qian Gua  and Figure 4.
The second is the set of Jiao Gua  or Reverse pairs, in which the T rigrams or Ba
Gua switch places. The eight Hexagrams or Gua formed by doubled T rigrams (the
448

Chong G ua) are left out. See Dimensions under Jiao Gua  and Figure 6. Twenty-
eight also occurs in Chinese astrology, in the Twenty-eight Lunar Mansions,
which was added to the Yijing lore during the Han dynasty.
Two Scales of Thirty-Two also show up in these paired Gua dimensions.
The first is the thirty-two Gua pairs which form the meaningful part of the Hou
Tian (Later Heaven) or Wen Wang  (King Wen) Sequence, the chapter numbers
most familiar to readers. These are the twenty-eight Qian Gua  or Inverse pairs
above, plus the four opposite pairs which are symmetrical and so have no inverse.
See Dimensions, under Gua Xu and Figures 3 and 27. The second scale is that of
the thirty-two Pang Tong Gua pairs, the Opposites. See Di mensions, under Pang
Tong Gua and Figure 5.
The fourteen elements of the three S cales of Two, F our and Eight now
follow in sequence. Connotations (as distinct from definitions) are given for each
element in a list format. Readers should note whether or not a Key Words or
Glosses segment contains itemized entries, or has a note which says to “Compare
Counterparts.” These connotations should be studied in com parison to, and in
contrast with, each other. These terms, when they are used in juxtaposition, will
help to refine each other’s boundaries of meaning. If you find the listing of these
on separate pages instead of in a 
tabular format to be inconvenient then you may
find it a useful educational exercise to make these tables up yourself, adding your
own notes as you go. All of the Wai Guang entries belong to scales and so have
counterparts. The central concepts being presented here are very broad in scope.
Each item within a scale divides a large spectrum of reality into a very finite
number of parts and the range of each core meaning is extensive. The key words
are meant to point to some of the major features in each domain to help one “get
one’s mind around” the idea. These lists could be made more exhaustive, but
never fully. Care was taken to avoid words which could be too easily assigned to
more than one sym bol. Once the core of the symbol’s meaning is grasped, as well
as some of the limits of its particular part of the landscape, it begins to act as a
nexus for further associations, or a kind of a filing code.
Many of the intracultural and extracultural correspondences, associations
and connotations given in this section are clearly anachronistic terms relative to
the Zhouyi . A large number of these are even anachronistic relative to the Yijing.
This is primarily a Yixue analysis. But I have tried to identify the general time
periods of these attributions. The segments titled "Glosses from the Text" are
Zhouyi terms. The segments titled "Glosses from the Shuo G ua,
" "Glosses from the
Xi Ci Zhuan" and "References from the Wings" are Shi Y i, Ten Wings, or Yijing
terms. The remainder are anachronistic or extraneous assignments.
Note: The five columns of information in the “Glosses” portions of the
following sections provide: 1) the character’s location in the source text, 2) the
character’s Pinyin pronunciation, 3) the character’s entry number in Harvard’s
1993 edition of the Mathews Chinese English Dictionary, 4) the first occurrence
of the character in the m ain body of the Y ijing, or where this character does not
appear, its radical and stroke count