ancient practices of divination and turn them into
metaphors. You could hide humorous insights deep inside the puzzle like Easter
eggs. Above all, as one specialized in studying the unfolding of life through time,
you may have been acutely aware of the progress of time in the lives of powerful
people, and aware that, no matter how powerful a person is destined to become,
one still begins life as a child in need of instruction. This is a wonderful place for a
38

writer and a counselor to be. The Sufis have a name for a teacher to the king,
adopted by our own Bard: Sheik's Pir.
The Myth of Objectivity
Does meaning inhere in a text? Is this something that is put there by the
authors with the intention that it be later recovered intact by the reader? Can one
"back engineer" this communication process to discover the authors' intent as a
way to help verify intended meaning? Or does all of this just lead to a hopeless
quagmire, a hall of mirrors of subjective conjecture? Anthropology, sinology and
Yixue (Yijing studies) are social, not physical sciences. Any approach that is not
self-deluded will necessarily have a subjective component ( verstehen, the use of
empathy in the social sciences to understand human action and behavior) which
is best acknowledged honestly, or else it will fall into the same trap that got
psychology (the study of behavior that somehow forgot that it, too, was
behavior). We are trying to understand what a handful of human beings who
lived thousands of years ago were trying to say. They left us strings of words that
got modified at least a little over time, especially when the forms of the words
were updated. It would seem that attempts at discovery alone have failed, unless
we are willing to settle for dancing elephants and grunting ham sters, and it may
be that great deal of speculative reconstruction will be r equired. This in its turn
will require that assumptions be made about the intent of the authors, opening the
door a little to imagination and even to empathy.
It should be clearly understood that the exercise of one’s subjectivity is
permitted in even the strictest of sciences, and particularly in the social sciences,
provided that its use is concentrated upon the generation of hypotheses which
are then to be tested or assessed by more objective criteria. While these criteria
have to be something greater and more cogent than "that feels good" or "this has
the ring of truth", I think that it ultimately has to be an aesthetic judgment of some
sort. Somehow you have to go deeper than simply measuring what the text does
to your own thoughts. You have to risk being wrong o
r else you risk being a
solipsist. The authors were not trying to teach me "whatever I might want to
make of it". Knowledge can be as objective as it wants to be, but understanding
represents at least an attempt at empathy, an attempt to reconstruct the personal
experience of what the writer wants conveyed.
I am not sure that it is even important whether there is something real or
reified or hypostasized called Meaning, an entity dwelling deep inside the w ritten
words. I think that what m atters is that authors think they are putting this into
their text in the hope of its later recovery. It is likely that they did not know the
readers would be us, or they might have explained themselves better. The Zhouyi
of course represents a special case of meaning in that the intention would be to
evoke certain classes of ad hoc  responses to situations, rather than imp arting
definitive and specified packets of explicit knowledge. But even this is much
more explicit than what the poet wants from his words (poets would be happy
just to make you dizzy, or erotically aroused, and they would even lie to you to
get that desired effect). It may be true that the reader can never truly be certain
39

whether the meaning taken from a text will correspond precisely to the author's
intent, but this lack of certainty is not a reason to never try. It is not