guage had
496

to be leaked to people incapable of completely understanding it. Maybe this was
part confused and part stabilized or clarified by the gradual secularization of the
written word, which was happening in full force at the time. And so there came to
be branches in the tree. As the diviners spread out from the inner court and their
communication became less imm ediate, there came to be the "fault lines of
interpretive practice" in the Zuozhuan that Kidder Smith (p. 424) points out. The
authors were no longer around to answer questions. And the precise glosses of
the Zhouyi's  terms would have to be inferred from this time onward either from
their gathering momentum or from their fading tracks through the centuries.
The hypothesis that the Zhouyi continued to change throughout this period
is not without its merits. For a book which has such an unusually orderly
superstructure, there is a great deal of unevenness in the length of the individual
sections of text, which ranges fr om a thirty-character paragraph to several
instances of only two-character statements. By this advanced point in its history
a book held to be sacred would not be lightly emended or added to. If there were
new insights added, they at least do not appear to be out of place or gravely
anachronistic. But the persistent misunderstanding of a line, or the frequent
failure of a particular line in divinatory use, or even a single disastrous failure,
could have led to that line’s permanent dele tion, perhaps even by a royal de cree.
Accordingly, if changes did occur throughout this period, the overall text is more
likely to have lost more content than it gained, but in a direction of greater surety.
In other words, many of the Hexagram and Line texts may merely be fragments.
Towards the end of the Spring and Autumn Period, roughly coinciding with
the beginning of the Iron Age, lived two of the philosophers who were to shape
the course of Chinese thought for millenia to come, through a dialectic which is
today still far from synthesis. They would also have profound and far-reaching
effects on the growth and interpretation of the Yi. The first, according to tradition
rather than history, was Laozi, the father of Daoism, who simply left us with a
four-thousand character essay known as the Dao D
e Jing, and rode away on a
water buffalo. The second was a troubled individual by the name of Kongfuzi,
known to the west as Confucius, who lived from 551 to 479. Later stories by the
Daoist Zhuangzi would sketch tales of encounters between these two men, in
which the latter would not compare at all well in wisdom to the former, but t hese
are only teaching stories to contrast two points of view. Laozi was an earthy sort
of pantheistic mystic, who sought his wisdom in unspoiled nature, and found a
great unwisdom in the human social structures. His ethic was one of a natural
purity. Kongfuzi took the opposite view and saw nature as a state to be tran-
scended and refined in human civilization, according to examples set long before
by the wise sovereigns of a lost golden era. He too was ethical, but his ethics took
the form of moralizing, and this was why he was troubled: he could find but a few
ears for his philosophy while he was still alive and challenging people to their
faces. He was not greatly inclined to m etaphysics, or to divination either, but his
strong belief in human ideals and human ideas helped to lay the foundation for a
great deal of the elaborate metaphysical speculation by his followers. This is the
497

easiest way to distinguish Confucius from Confucianism where there is a question
of authorship.
These two perspectives would reincarnate throughout human history to
continue the battle around the globe, the former laughing and being skeptical,
and the latter scolding and believing in the priority of human ideas. In ancient
Greece they were Diogenes and Plato, in Western philosophy, existentialism and
essentialism. There is no solid evidence of a st