ingly, supremely fulfilling
138

14.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.1: cauldron's upturned feet, expelling the stagnant)
Having no commerce with trouble
To never be wrong
A hardship, but otherwise not a mistake
14.1x The big domain (of) first nine
(Is a) lack of commerce with trouble
He remains down below to watch those above become slaves to their cravings for
wealth, compromise themselves for bad dreams, sell their souls for false promises.
He wants to be free of this servitude and to have no commerce with something so
harmful. He might be right about what is inferior here. The propertied classes may
spend their whole lives to command no more than the power to rearrange what they
look at. But if the real wealth is a freedom, he will never find it in this much aversion
to common human traits, or by twisting up his eyes at every evil he can find. A true
wealth moves, interacts and makes changes, and it may or may not have its uses for
big bags of money. If scowling is hard on the stomach maybe it’s bad for health.
So why not instead set compelling examples of a noble and wholesome simplicity?
14.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
Fan Yao 30.2: golden radiance, most promising
The great wagon is for loading
Have somewhere to go
Nothing is wrong
14.2x The great wagon (is) for loading:
To add to the middle (means) to be without loss
Great wealth is like this great wagon, waiting to be loaded or emptied, with a value
in either condition: loaded means it is useful, emptied means it is mobile, ready to
respond to the unforeseen chance. Wealth depends more upon what is moved, and
the movement itself, than upon what is owned or contained. It might make just as
much use of things which it does not have. And rolling stock is not just something
possessed, it needs to get dirty and worn. As long as the supply is moving towards
the demand, wealth grows. Try hauling cargo both ways, moving in both directions
with things in demand. Free trade will see all sides advance. Then you can love your
work, get paid to travel and have a clear conscience as well. This is like rubbing the
portly belly of luck. You are this vehicle here. Cargo is neither you nor your future.
139

14.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.3: seeing wagon held up, no beginning, but an end)
The prince presents offerings to the son of heaven
The common people cannot
14.3x The prince presents offerings to the son of heaven:
(For) common people, harmful
Why not stand out on the promontory and throw gold coins at the sun? The prince
donates wealth to his wealthier lord, while the commoner people cannot understand
why things move in this direction. There is no clear ulterior motive, and nothing to
gain by such loss. They might sooner harm themselves than be caught acting thus.
And herein there may be a clue. You cannot hold flame from the skies in clenched
hands, so if you want to grasp, grasp that wealth is all about circulation. In theory,
such offerings are not made to get more in return, but to work on your worthiness,
to express your gratitude, to offer up trust that good will come back around and to
practice the sun’s way with wealth. For the gifted ones the higher power is giving.
The needy cannot escape real needs and they cannot move on until these are met.
14.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.4: a young bull’s corral, most promising)
This is not one’s own domain
No blame
14.4x Not being (in) one’s own domain, no blame:
Wisdom distinguishes plainly
Some say that we own this world by virtue of having laid claims. Some say that we
inherit it from those who came before us. Some say we borrow it from people yet to
come, a distant seven generations from now. And another group claims that it won’t
be truly possessed by human beings at all. If we are to survive, in any pleasant way,
we will learn that these property rights are nothing more than a trust, for the whole
of life to come, all of the myriad beings, includ