ed the pattern of the pretended stu ff. The
old minister listened attentively to their words, in order that he might repeat them
to the Em peror; and then the knaves asked for more silk and gold, saying that it
was necessary to complete what they had begun. However, they put all that was
given them into their knapsacks; and continued to work with as much apparent
diligence as before at their empty looms.
The Emperor now sent another officer of his court to see how the men
were getting on, and to ascertain whether the cloth would soon be ready. It w
as
just the same with this gentleman as with the minister; he surveyed the looms on
all sides, but could see nothing at all but the empty frames.
"Does not the stuff appear as beautiful to you, as it did to my lord the
minister?" asked the impostors of the Emperor's second am bassador; at the same
time making the same gestures as before, and talking of the design and colors
which were not there.
"I certainly am not stupid!" thought the messenger. "It must be, that I am
not fit for my good, profitable office! That is very odd; however, no one shall
know anything about it." And accordingly he praised the stuff he could not see,
and declared that he was delighted with both colors and patterns. "Indeed, please
your Im perial Majesty," said he to his sovereign when he returned, "the cloth
which the weavers are preparing is extraordinarily magnificent."
The whole city was talking of the splendid cloth which the Emperor had
ordered to be woven at his own expense.
And now the Emperor himself wished to see the costly manufacture, while
it was still in the loom. Accompanied by a select number of officers of the court,
among whom were the two honest men who had already admired the cloth, he
went to the crafty impostors, who, as soon as they were aware of the Emperor's
approach, went on working more diligently than ever; although they still did not
pass a single thread through the looms.
"Is not the work absolutely magnificent?" said the two officers of the
crown, already mentioned. "If your Majesty will only be pleased to look at it!
What a splendid design! What glorious colors!" and at the same time they pointed
542

to the empty frames; for they imagined that everyone else could see this exquisite
piece of workmanship.
"How is this?" said the Emperor to himself. "I can see nothing! This is
indeed a terrible affair! Am I a simpleton, or am I unfit to be an Emperor? That
would be the worst thing that could happen--Oh! the cloth is charming," said he,
aloud. "It has my complete approbation." And he smiled most graciously, and
looked closely at the empty looms; for on no account would he say that he could
not see what two of the officers of his court had praised so much. All his retinue
now strained their eyes, hoping to discover something on the l ooms, but they
could see no more than the others; nevertheless, they all exclaimed, "Oh, how
beautiful!" and advised his majesty to have some new clothes made from this
splendid material, for the approaching procession.
"Magnificent! C harming! Excellent!" resounded on all sides; and every-
one was uncommonly gay. The Emperor shared in the general satisfaction; and
presented the impostors with the riband of an order of knighthood, to be worn in
their button-holes, and the title of "Gentlemen Weavers."
The rogues sat up the whole of the night before the day on which the
procession was to take place, and had sixteen lights burning, so that everyone
might see how anxious they were to finish the Emperor's new suit. They preten-
ded to roll the cloth off the looms; cut the air with their scissors; and sewed with
needles without any thread in them. "See!" cried they, at last. "The Emperor's new
clothes are ready!"
And now the Emperor, with all the grandees of his court, came to the
weavers; and the rogues raised their arms, as if in the act of holding something up,
saying, "Here are your Majesty's trousers! Here is the scarf! Here is the mantle!
The whole s