From the Glossary
shi4 (to) bite (into, on), bite down on, bite off, eat, devour, gnaw, chew (on) (s,
ed, ing)
he2 (to be) through, together, closed, closing; (to
) consolidate, bi te, eat, chew,
join the teeth; close, shut, unite, join (s, ed, ing); noisily, loudly, completely; as
ke4: suddenly, promptly
21.T, Tuan Zhuan
Between the jaws is an object
So this is called biting through
Biting through and then satisfaction:
The firm (and) the flexible (are) evenly apportioned
Action with clarity
Thunder (and) lightning converge and make manifest
The flexible gains the center and then acts above
Although not properly situated
(It is) worthwhile to execute justice
180

21.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.1: advance frustrated, wits for confidence, tolerate)
Sandaled feet, shackled in stocks, hiding the toes
Not a mistake
21.1x Sandaled feet, shackled in stocks, hiding the toes:
Not progressing
Few have never been first time offenders, although many have never been caught.
This is a first misdemeanor, a minor mistake, a nibble on that great poison cheese.
The knowledge that one has been stupid is all the wisdom  most need in order to
move on. To take the education needs little remorse and less resentment or rancor.
This punishment speaks to the crime: to own two feet is not the license to trespass,
or tread too far astray, or stay on this recent path. One is not free to go there again
or move in that way the next time. Deprived awhile of toes, one relearns the value
of walking more freely about. Restraints are there to mimic restraint and hint that
to control this yourself would be better. The little debt to society is easy to redeem:
just limit the options. You don’t shoot the dog until he brings home his third skunk.
21.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.2: meeting with the leader in the alley, not wrong)
Biting into tender meat, burying the nose
No harm done
21.2x Biting (into) tender meat, burying the nose:
Relying on firmness
He has lived a stressful and strenuous life. His meat has always been fairly tough.
While dining with high born, gentler folk he’s taken too firm a bite. Meet the new
marshal in town, with a nose that knows no art for the dainty, more for tracking the
scents of the wild. This ever-so-delicate flesh is not a match for his usual chomp.
His teeth bang loudly together and this makes the thin-skinned nibblers nervous.
So much for doubting his place on the food chain. At least the bite has been bitten.
But is he ready for too big a serving of justice, too poorly prepared to mete out some
leniency, or too crude to comprehend fair mitigation? Does he mean to cut through
the protocols thus? Will he beat some hapless jaywalker senseless? Who will teach
whom a thing or two here? Maybe force and finesse can meet halfway, in firmness.
181

21.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.3: sun declines, no drums, songs: moans & laments)
Biting into preserved meat
Encountering decay
A little embarrassing
But no blame
21.3x Encountering decay:
The position is not appropriate
Gnawing away at old, dried meat he bites into something gone bad. There will be
some delay before he can execute justice, as he finds time unpleasantly stretched
into long and unloveable moments, face first into the privy, with no way to save face,
instill awe, gain credibility or set impressive examples. Things are more complex
than first thought. The troubles he thought he could deal with quickly took some
time to grow rotten, with underlying causes, hidden implications, toxic pathologies
and clearly something festering. A sickening revelation. A revolting development.
With roots down deep in the past, it is not easy to get this over and done with. Once
he can get this out of his system and the bad taste out of his mouth, he will know
to look for old problems, with deeper roots and causes long in need of correction.
21.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.4: tiger's search, staring, glaring, passion t