bers, are Rou, Yin, or Broken L ines. Seven and Nine,
the odd numbers, are Gang, Yang, Solid or Whole Lines. They are written thus:
Six:        X Eight: 
Seven: Nine:             0
The Six is a Stressed, Unstable or Old Yin Line:
upon Changing, it becomes a Seven or Yang Line.
The Nine is a Stressed, Unstable, or Old Yang Line:
upon Changing, it becomes an Eight or Yin Line.
The Hexagram or Gua is built upwards from the Bottom or First Line to the Top or
Sixth Line. For example, if the six numbers which you received, in order, were:
Eight, Seven, Six, Eight, Eight and Nine, the Hexagram would grow like this:
                                            0
                                                     X                     X                     X                     X
 1st  8              7,  2nd            6,  3rd            8,  4th             8,  5th             Top  9
Referring to the Basic Key to the Hexagrams in the back of the book, and cross-
indexing the upper and lower three lines or Trigrams, gives the Chapter, Gua or
Hexagram number 04, which is called Meng, or Inexperience. This is the Original,
Initial or Ben Gua . If this Hexagram had been composed only of Sevens and
Eights, this would be the only chapter you would read, and the only segments
here which you would pay attention to would be the Key Words, the Gua Ci ,
the Da Xiang and the Tuan Zhuan.  You would not be referred to any of the Yao
Ci or Changing Line texts. But in this case, you would also read the texts for the
Changing Lines: 6 3rd and Top 9, plus the associated Xiao Xiang  texts. In the
next step you change the Changing Lines into their opposites, thus:
     0
     X            Becomes:
The new Hexagram or Gua is the Resultant, Approached or Zhi Gua . Returning
to the Basic Key to the Hexagrams, you will find that this i
s Chapter, Gua or
Hexagram 46, Sheng, or Advancement. This is the direction  of the change. Here,
43

you would read only the Key Words, the Gua Ci, the Da Xiang, and the Tuan
Zhuan. There are no more Changing Lines to look up.
When you have this figured out and have practiced it a few times, you may
be ready to move to a more detailed and more informative method, which Mondo
Secter has termed “Transitional Hexagrams.” As explained in History, the Yao C i
is an interpolation between the Original, Initial or Ben Gua , and the Resultant or
Zhi Gua. The Yao Ci  meaning is derived in part  from the two Gua , which differ
by one line. Where there are two or more Yao C i, the interpolation is more
complex. This “Transitional Hexagram” method requires changing the Hexagram
or Gua in intermediate steps, starting with the lowest changing line. Only the
lowest of the Changing Line texts is read in each succeeding Chapter. In the
example used on the previous page, the reading sequence would be:
1) Gua 04, Key Words, Gua Ci, Da Xiang, Tuan Zhuan.
2) Gua 04, 6 3rd
3) Gua 18, Key Words, Gua Ci, Da Xiang, Tuan Zhuan
(This is the Transitional or intermediate Gua, obtained by changing only the 
lowest line and returning to the Basic Key for the next step.)
4) Gua 18, Top 9
5) Gua 46, Key Words, Gua Ci, Da Xiang, Tuan Zhuan
This often makes more sense because it tracks more closely the process or train of
interpolative thought by which the Yao Ci were, in p art, derived. [The flip-side of
this process, called the Fan Yao, is discussed in Di mensions, under Gua Bian or
Hexagram Changes].
There are many dimensions to the structure of the Hexagram beyond those of
the Six Lines. The most important of these, and the one most necessary to a basic
understanding of the Yi, is the division of the six lines into two three-line Trigrams
or Ba Gua. These are called the Ban Xiang, or Half Images. The Trigram formed by
the bottom three lines is called the Zhen Gua, the one formed by the top three is
called the Hui Gua. The Trigrams are interpreted differently according to which of
these places they are found in. In the lower 
place they can often refer to pa