k to be picky. Then there are the
nervous birds and those who will worry themselves halfway to death over whether
a meal is healthy. The attractions of combustible substances, those matters at hand
that are richest in energy, or in exothermic potential or delicious implication, drive us
forward through life. It’s just the way things are set up, along the whole length of
the food chain. We need to get out there, hunt and kill things, to turn them into us.
215

27.M, Key Words
Appetites, hungers, drives; sustenance, nutrition, nurture, provision, nourishment
Meeting needs, furnishing necessities, self-reliance, self-assertion, competence
Choices of menu, diet, good taste, selecting the input for output, fostering health
Finding the genuine & productive appetites, starving the false; potential energy
Appetite and its gratification, nutrition as a science, fostering growth and the true
Nutrient and energy cycles, raw material and fuel; hungering properly; G.I.G.O.
27.G, From the Glossary
yi2 (a, the) appetite, hunger (s); nourishment, nutrition, sustenance, jaws, open
jaws, mouth, hungry mouth, chin, cheek; self-care; (to) take care of oneself, keep
fit, consume, eat, take in, ingest, feed on, nourish, rear, feed, furnish necessities,
care for; hunger (s, ed, ing); (to be) appetitive, hungry, oral; with appetite, with
hunger
27.T, Tuan Zhuan
Hungry mouth
Persistence (is) promising:
Nourish uprightness (and) in due order good fortune
Study the hungry mouth:
Study what is the purpose in nourishment
From the searching mouth (to) the feeding:
Study what are the sources of nourishment
Heaven (and) earth nourish the myriad beings
The wise ones nourish the worthy
(and) thereby reach the whole of humanity
Hungry mouth’s opportune timing (is) very important here!
216

27.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.1: deprive bed of legs, don’t dismiss persistence)
Forsaking your spirit tortoise*
Looking at me with hungry mouth hanging open
Disappointing
27.1x Looking at me (with) hungry mouth hanging open:
Truly lacking (as) a basis for respect
You already have most of the answers you need. We are born with a great wisdom,
a wonderful hunger and thirst. The humans whom we know best have been studying
the human dao for a hundred thousand years. These lessons have worked their way
into our genes and tastes. Give a toddler too many choices of dishes, spread across
the whole spectrum of foods, and in weeks, with no coaching, he will learn to select
perfect meals, with hunger for all the right foods and no appetite for the wrong ones.
But a modest amount of sufficiency unto ourselves is a critical part of this process.
We must at least get up and walk to our prey. What else should we put into gaping,
drooling holes? The medicine tortoise, the one long life that we live, is a feast for the
right predators. Thankfully this tortoise is less than fleet of foot: one may catch up.
27.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.2: hold, don’t push, avoid decrease to increase)
Subverted appetites
Dismissing the customary,
Going into the hills hungering
Going boldly into failure
27.2x Six second goes boldly (into) failure:
Behavior (that) strays from its kind
He listens to his belly, then listens to his head. While down in the valley, he hungers
for food on the summit. Up on the summit, he misses the food in the valley. He runs
around a lot this way, but it does not lead to fitness. He only feeds his inadequacies,
while talents double over with hunger. There is really only one of him, but it doesn’t
agree with itself. It doesn’t go hunting together. It’s more like begging than hunting,
or being eaten alive by a hunger. Good taste agrees with good appetite and knows it
must munch on what is at hand, or be as a sheep on the prowl, after greener grasses,
or as be mutton for a greater hunger. It might be best to starve the bad hungers now
and then learn to hunger first for things needed, and then for things wanted and last
for things he’s told h