admitted. Without ambient glare even the  
stars might be seen. The big price to pay for abundance is the nuisance of extreme  
distraction. Both sharp focus and executive decision making, imagined or referred  
to here as tunnel vision, are needed to achieve anything of value in this maze. But  
one may take advantage of the amazement and distractedness of others. 
* 55.4 Working in darkness refers to Zhi Gua 36, Brightness Obscured, and to the  
covert operations discussed at Fan Yao  36.4. To remain focused turns a dark  
situation into an enlightened covert intelligence. 
 
55, Wai Guang  
* Qabalah: He; Path between Tipareth and Geburah (Trad: Tp-Cm) 
* Tarot : The Emperor (Executive dispatch) 
* Astrology: First House, Cardinal Fire, Aries 
 
55, Quotations 
* We are mistaken in believing that the mind and judgment are two separate things;  
judgment is only the extent of the mind’s illumination. —La Rochefoucauld 
* Give your decisions, never your reasons, your decisions may be right, your  
reasons are sure to be wrong. —Lord Mansfield 
* “Fellow suffering!  Fellow suffering with the higher men!” he cried out, and his  
countenance changed to brass. “Well that hath had its time!  My suffering and my  
fellow suffering - what matter about them! ... . This is my morning, my day  
beginneth” ... . Thus spake Zarathustra and left his cave, glowing and strong, like a  
morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.” —Nietzsche, TSZ #80 
* Guess if you can, choose if you dare. —Corneille 
* For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required.  
—Luke 12:48 
* Life has a way of overgrowing its achievement as well as its ruins.  
—Edith Wharton 
* Everything not forbidden is compulsory. —T. H. White 
388

GUA 56, LU3, THE WANDERER
 
  Binary 001 101 = 13; Gen below, Li above
56.X, Overall Image
Atop the mountain is a flame
The wanderer
The noble young one, accordingly, is lucid and prudent
about the function of sanctions
And thus avoids prolonged legal process
The nomad sets up his camp, where none have chosen to live, and kindles a modest
blaze. None but the homeless would call this a home, but like the flame his home is
wherever his fuel is. He must take what he needs and move on. What he carries is
familiar to him. His best friend is a small, hot fire, without much smoke or signal.
The rest of the world is new or strange, until he makes himself welcome, or until he
can feel at home. If he cannot he might need to leave quickly. He will want to stay
clear here, and remain his own judge. There is a challenging wisdom in keeping his
security minimal. But a diplomat from the wider world has no diplomatic immunity.
56.0, The Wanderer
With modest fulfillment
The wanderer persists
Promising
The stranger approaching the inn at the edge of the town has very little outside of
himself to tell what he is to the others, whether he might be a pilgrim or bum, or a
tourist gone native,  a merchant, a fugitive from the good, or a refugee from the bad,
the newest citizen here or a lesson painfully learned. Those who would keep moving
freely practice a code of conduct and honor, trying to keep a buildup of trust which
one bad rogue can destroy without effort. The benefits of doubt, the presumptions
of innocence, are in delicate states of balance. With careful reserve and intelligence,
free agents traveling lightly explore the landscape beyond the great watershed. Most
of their souvenirs are memories or stories. Much depends upon what they can carry.
A mouthful of sustenance, and a handful to spare, is great wealth, perhaps between
weeks of having much less. Thus a modest fulfillment is all that the wanderer needs.
He carries few tools, but each one has thousands of uses. Friendships, like a flame,
can be easy to kindle but hard to hold on to. Nearly all his relations are distant, yet
his best skill is making good will out of suspicion and welcome out of strangeness.
389

56.M, Key Words
Traveler, stranger, itinerant, peddler, newcome