, Bo, Decomposing
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 8th Moon (Sept)
20, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Kether in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Ace of Swords
* Astrology: Saturn in Air
20, Quotations
* He, however, who is intrusive with his eyes as a discerner, how can he ever see
more of anything than its foreground? —Nietzsche, TSZ #45
* Yes, the Springs had need of you. Many a star was waiting for you to spy it.
Many a wave would rise on the past toward you ... All this was a trust. But were
you equal to it?  Were you not always distracted by expectation, as though all this
were announcing someone to love? —Rilke, 1st Duino Elegy
* Men are more apt to be mistaken in their generalizations than in their particular
observations. —Machiavelli
* There must be the true man, and then there is the true knowledge. —Zhuangzi
* ... for our complicated experiments have no longer anything to do with nature in
her own right, but with nature charged and transformed by our own cognitive
activity. —Werner Heisenberg
* The most fatal illusion is the settled point of view. Since life is growth and
motion, a fixed point of view kills anybody who has one. —Brooks Atkinson
178

GUA 21, SHI4 HE2, BITING THROUGH
 
  Binary 100 101 = 37; Zhen below, Li above
21.X, Overall Image
Thunder and lightning bite through
The early sovereigns, accordingly,
clarified penalties when declaring the laws
White-hot, jagged teeth and then a big crunch, with no pause between them. Clarity
first and then vigorous movement. The cause of the problems has ended and all of
the nonsense is done. The founders made a few simple laws, defined them clearly,
and announced what the punishments were for their trespass. Then, when the social
trust was betrayed, justice was done in bronze and blood. Everybody was warned,
so committing a crime was to clearly ask for the consequences. And then the whole
process came due. But the laws were few and clear then and all of those crimes had
victims. Someone could use a truth for defense and reason could play the advocate.
21.0, Biting Through
Satisfaction
Worthwhile to execute justice
The beast who reigns supreme in a land does not trouble himself with antagonists.
He bites the one who makes trouble. A prince does not compete with gossips and
traitors: he makes clear examples. This world already has too many people, and a
hard enough time with trust. Then why not start cleaning up, right here and now?  
The ideal justice is seldom attained. The tangled mass of law is written by lawyers.
Bad precedents in the courts are still precedents. Enforcement of the law is wildly
inconsistent. Sometimes laws will make nearly everyone criminals, to give the state
more control. The codes proliferate fruitlessly and rarely get pruned. Both sides of
the dispute are argued by toothless advocates, with mouths full of mush, and each
with less than half of the truth. It isn’t really a wonder then that crime and confusion
prevail, that justice lacks teeth and moral force bite. To the gamblers the odds must
look pretty good. What stands most in need of some lightning and thunder today
is this system. Its obstacles, obstructions, predicaments and dilemmas are part of its
very nature. The answer is less law, not more, against force and fraud, with victims.
179

21.M, Key Words
Gnaw, chew, bite + close together, shut noisily, clamp down; meta-level solutions
Retributive justice, enforcement, force, execution, dispatch, severity, lex talionis
Emphatic judgment; police action & power; legal recourse, punishment, sentence
Cogency, credibility, teeth, bite, decisiveness, incisiveness, trenchancy; severance
Instruments of justice, legal constraints, criminal law (dist Gua 06, civil disputes)
Insufferable things; accountability, culpability; closure, finality, termination, ends
21.G, From the Glossary
shi4 (to) bite (into, on), bite down on, bite off, eat, devour, gnaw, chew (on) (s,
ed, ing)
he2 (to be) through, together, closed, closing; (to
) consolidate, bi te, eat, chew,
join