t, present, steadfast, anchored, rooted, grounded
Concentration, introspection, reflection, meditation, quietude, self-containment
Prepossession, reserve, balance, stability, equilibrium, poise; the matter at hand
Touchstone, paragon, terminus; silence, resting, inertness; presence, self mastery
Pressures building to not be still; self-examination; backbone, integrity, principle
52.G, From the Glossary
gen4 (to) still, check, limit, restrain, constrain, prevent, confine, arrest, define,
resist, be obstinate; keep still, just be, hold steady, balance, rest, set, settle, quiet,
suspend (s, ed, ing); (a, the) restraint, confinement, definition, boundary, setting,
obstacle ahead, stillness, equilibrium, rest, [ inertia]; stiffness; opposition, hos-
tility; (to be) outspoken, straightforward, candid, blunt, simple, honest; refractory,
stubborn, obstinate, perverse
52.T, Tuan Zhuan
Stillness
(Means) to keep still
 (If) time to stop, then stop
(If) time to move, then move
(When) activity (and) rest do not lose their timing
One’s path (is) revealed (and) clarified
Stillness (means) self-restraint
Restraint (is) to one’s own purpose
Above (and) below resist corresponding
Having nothing to do with each other
And so it is that having no grasp of one’s own being
(And) moving (through) one’s courtyard
Without seeing other people
(Is) without blame
366

52.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.1: adorning the feet, dismissing carriage, walking)
Stilling those toes
Making no mistakes
Warranting prolonged persistence
52.1x Stilling those toes:
Before losing the principle
He plants his toes like pudgy, little pink roots, and tries to hold some ground here,
deciding upon inaction as a cure for wrong action, not-doing a cure for wrongdoing.
He gets a good start at stopping by slowing himself to a crawl. Although he seems
to be going too far in going nowhere at all, at least now he might pay more attention.
Nothing ever really stops moving and changing, not even ancient and sacred stones.
Stillness and equilibrium are states that we find in our minds, when we cease to be
out of phase or at war with our thoughts and the world. But this sort of stillness can
still move quite quickly, balance can swing back and forth and still be balance, and
equilibrium is more often than not a dynamic. What he now has is more like a rest,
the point of which is finding the proper beginning. But the end is still far from here.
52.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 18: Gu, Detoxifying
(Fan Yao 18.2: correcting mother’s fixations, hard to persist)
Stilling those legs
Not helpful in one’s pursuits
One’s heart is not gratified
52.2x Not helpful in one’s pursuits:
Not ready to back off (and) listen
Bringing his legs to a halt, stopping to look around, he’s learned, to his amazement,
that he treads an inferior path. His heart does not want him to make this discovery.
Now there is turning around to be done, explaining himself, excusing himself, and
figuring out where to go and what to do next. Indeed, this does not help him at all
to maintain his old pursuits, though he still has some old inertia to spend. The paths
or people he had chosen to follow are too set or full of their own directions to turn
back and question themselves. He could remain swept along, as if by peer suction,
feigning some sort of innocence, and leaving that nagging, old conscience behind.
But innocence would soon become ignorance and the conscience an unsettled mind.
It is only his lack of stillness now that makes his right and true path more distant.
367

52.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.3: curtailing itself is not a mistake)
Setting those restrictions
Divided at one’s waist
Rigors choke the heart
52.3x Setting those restrictions:
Crises choke the heart
He divides his being between high and low and will not touch the inferior parts. As a
matter of having a course to our lives, we need to find and set limits, curtail and train
our natures to keep ourselves out of trouble. But to violate