ng and inexperienced seek me
The first consultation informs
The second and third show disrespect
Disrespect deserves no information
It is worthwhile to be dedicated
It is not the duty or function of oracles to chase a young fool around with advice.
Nor is it wisdom to give or seek answers. Wis dom lies in the way one questions,
the say one has in the way that one hungers, the taste that one has in one’s wants.
Pointless, inane and importune questions get no information at all, but not because
they irk Teacher. There is just nothing there to receive or contain information, and
no way to process the changes. You do not need the answer to question, but this will
shape the response with language and context. To learn is to change oneself, from
an earlier state to a later. The young one is born with half of what is needed and half
of what must be lost. Too much of potential is there in the being at birth, to go to
half of anywhere, and do half of any thing, but half of which are danger and trouble.
To this end the young one begins his life as a halfwit. The other half is the culture,
tempered by family and friends, with two tools: for all there is to be lost there is no,
for all to be won there is yes. The child is blessed who has both in good measure.
To grow in every direction is no direction at all. Being specific means boundaries.
77

04.M, Key Words
Early development, education, guidance; differentiating, specifying, personalizing
Inquiry, questioning, questing, discovery; fulfilling potentials, talents, aptitudes
Foolishness, folly, ignorance; a childlike hunger to k now, untrained green vines
To be covered, blinded, immature, obscure, obtuse, uncultivated, inexperienced
Making connections and pruning, learning and unlearning, training the mind
Educate as to lead out; instruction; importance of questions in fr aming answers
04.G, From the Glossary
meng2 (a, the) inexperience, immaturity, innocence, darkness, obscurity, cover,
ignorance, insensibility, foolishness, deception, folly, stupidity, fool, halfwit,
(tangled, untrained) green vines; (to) cover, conceal, hide, cheat, dupe, deceive,
darken, stun, receive, suffer, undergo (s, ed, ing); (to be) inexperienced, uncul-
tivated, rudimentary, rude, crude; passive, subjected to; entangled, obscure, im-
mature, young, ignorant, foolish, dull, green, blind, in the dark, darkened, en-
veloped, uninformed, shrouded, un enlightened, unconscious, insensible, foolish;
the small of a thing; go with covered eyes
04.T, Tuan Zhuan
Inexperience
At the foot of the mountain are hazards
(To be) at risk and yet remain still
(Shows) inexperience
Inexperience (is) fulfilled:
According to fulfillment’s conduct at the heart of the time
It is not I (who) seeks the young (and) inexperienced,
The young (and) inexperienced seek me:
The objectives (are) complementary
The first consultation informs:
According to the firmness within
The second (and) third (show) disrespect
Disrespect deserves no information:
Disrespect (shows) immaturity
Inexperience (is) the way to cultivate uprightness
(This is) a sacred task
78

04.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 41: Sun, Decreasing
(Fan Yao 41.1: one’s own affairs are rushed, ponder decreasing this)
Delivering the inexperienced
It is worthwhile and useful to discipline another
If practiced to remove the shackles and cuffs
But for this to continue is a disgrace
04.1x Worthwhile (and) useful to discipline another:
For the sake of ethical standards
The wild and unruly behavior of lively young fools poses a serious question or two:
How much is mine to do? And: How much can I get away with? And this deserves
a serious answer: about half of what you might do, but not to include that tantrum,
or playing under the wagon, or biting your little friend’s nose off. There is so much
to unlearn, even right at the start. Some of the lessons won’t wait : the need for them
must be assumed, maybe restraint in the form of restraints. But the object is making
these a part of the subject, discipline g