to make this
distinction. The latter term is value neutral, the former is value negative. Although
the net effect of an excess of commonness is still Pi, or entropy, this is attributable
more to simple ignorance and ethical infirmity (bu gang ) than to evil, or arrogant
ignorance or moral depravity. The inferior may be seen as entropy’s vanguard.
There is a proper place in the world for the common person, no proper place for the
inferior person.
12, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Briah in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Three of Swords
* Astrology: Neptune in Air
12, Quotations
* Tie two birds together. They will not be able to fly
even though they now have four wings. —Rumi
* Looking aside: let that be my sole negation. —Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom
* It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.
—Shakespeare, Macbeth
* What loneliness is more lonely than distrust? —George Eliot
* Corruption  /  never has been compulsory, when the
cities lie at the monster’s feet there
are left the mountains. —Robinson Jeffers
* Monsters exist, but they are too few in number to be truly dangerous.
More dangerous are the common men, the functionaries ready to believe
and act without asking questions. —Primo Levi
* More harm has been done by weak persons than by wicked persons.
—Harry Kennedy
* It is no measure of health to be well adjusted to a profoundly sick society.
—Krishnamurti
130

GUA 13, TONG2 REN2, FELLOWSHIP w/ OTHERS
 
  Binary 101 111 = 47; Li below, Qian above
13.X, Overall Image
Heaven accompanies flame
Fellowship with Others
The noble young one, according to kind and family,
distinguishes the beings
In view of star-spattered heaven above, a flame rains its sparks into night, each spark
a star, adding its point of light. Around this, a constellation of wide-eyed hominids
perform their rites to the grand design. And the sage is found among them, fostering
the fellowship with analogies, distinguishing the beings by family and class, to draw
things together, not cut them apart. And yet he will keep all relevant scales in mind.
The fire does not enlighten the night, but the flame will make for a focus in common,
a unifying vision, a bonding experience and quite a little spectacle. So gathered here
we agree to disagree, exchange the best of our stories and songs, make our peace.
13.0 Fellowship with Others
on the frontier
Fulfillment
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
And worth the noble young one’s persistence
The little groups huddle together, at least well enough to find warmth and keep up
their courage and hope. In the midst of each circle, the radius point, is one thing held
in consensus, a thing believed in, an interest or goal, a line of descent or a niche in
the world. But the stars give humankind far too much room for agr eement, no one
school of thought can possibly fill all the available space. Thus we push and branch
outwards and cover this sphere and peer into space from all different angles and the
oddest directions. And so the search for the greater world means going across the
great waters, across our cultural boundaries, across the ages of time, outside of our
niches and sometimes out of our minds. After ages of trials and wars, the clans start
to take steps towards consensus, overcoming our disparities by returning to our old
common grounds. But we share much fantasy still, including the notion that there is
one truth and that only one school may own it. We yet need the breadth of all of our
minds to get around all of our problems. Our hope is as much in seeing things not
the same way. Our frontier isn’t the known: is that not the whole point of frontiers?
131

13.M, Key Words
Society, social organization, human association, classes of people, community
Extended family, fraternity, ag reement, coalition; crossing cultural boundaries
Ethnocentrism, anthropocentrism & xenophobia; common purposes & causes
Mutual endorsement and admiration societies, like-minded people, consensus
Schools of thought, group-think, cult