y those in positions of consequence, to make the best choices.
The Work, as you soon learned, was the growth of your clients, and thr ough
this, the evolution of your culture. Your truth was not the same species of truth
which your clients were seeking, the kind which is relative and relevant to only
one point of view. Yours shifted shapes and would deal directly with the broad
spectrum of anxiety, from the little worries to the paralyzing fears, which were all
in some way the results of the normal human perspective on time and change and
metamorphosis. You were, in a word, a guidance counselor and a mental health
professional. Your clients wanted their fortunes told, while you wanted them to
make fortunate choices. You could not, of course, simply tell them this, not that
you did not want to. Your first directive would always be to speak to each one in
accordance with their readiness for a lesson and with the given degree of under-
standing already developed. If you did not, both of you might fail. What was
belief to them was pragmatics to you. You needed credibility. But lacking this,
you would do what you could with credulity, and stuff the frustration when your
clients missed the point. The language you used to speak to them, the props of
your rituals and the steps of your dances, were largely prescribed by your clients'
505

expectations, which were molded in their turn by the scope of understanding
embodied in the culture at large. You could not simply go to the world next door
and bring back a simple new bit of common sense. That would not be glamorous
enough to penetrate the mindset. You would take equal parts frustration and
patience and turn the whole thing into a challenging puzzle.
The lore of your craft, which had been developing into its present form for
several centuries, and in other forms for millenia, had been handed down from
teacher to apprentice for many generations. It was handed down along with its
reputation for its usefulness in getting at truths. It was a solemn and sworn duty
to protect this reputation. Falseness was as real a foe as error and anxiety. This,
too, meant very different things to you and to your clients. The structure of your
methods, and the overall patterns made by the many kinds of prognostications,
made a world of its own in the mind: a coherent world in the mental dimension,
where Ming and Ling were as palpable as stone and heat. The believers would
take what they saw of this structure and project it onto the w orld, and onto the
stars of the universe. Everything would be retroactively arranged according to
this plan and structure, so that the latest insight became the primal truth. To you
this was simply making arrangements according to what the-little-that-is-known-
about-everything teaches. Their great truth was huge and all-encompassing, and
it even cared about them. Yours would be more humble and less pathetic. It was
your task to keep these in balance. The structures meant something to the extent
that they were useful, and they were useful to the extent that they accorded and
resonated with the higher laws of
 a very large world which was powerful and
careless enough to kill in a heartbeat, to starve a population, or to rip apart an ill-
founded culture, even a whole civilization. You had just watched a dynasty fall -
you knew why this could have been predicted, and you thought you knew how
this might have been avoided. Neither really concerned the action of fate.
Your four days on the road passed without mishap. Your driver, dispatched
by the palace, was able to brief you with an insider’s account of the changes of
the last eight years, the first of the new Zhou dynasty, but knew next to nothing
about your summons. You had one brief encounter with a robber, rather than the
three you would have expected a decade ago. He would not have hesitated to
accost your driver, but when he saw that you were Wu, he disappeared quickly:
sometimes your mystique had its benefits. On the who