nal
solution. This would be the "middle ground" fallacy. And I will readily admit to
the fallacy called argumentum ad iudicum, appeal to judgment or common sense.
I have already mentioned hasty generalization (a.k.a. converse accident) as
one of the problems. One example is: "We have only seen Fu used as “captive”
during this period, therefore Fu meant only this. It cannot be proved otherwise."
Actually this example is more complex because it also relies on argumentum a d
ignorantiam  (appeal to ignorance: absence of evidence is not evidence of
absence), and "shifting the burden of proof." Burden of proof needs to be more
fully assumed here. Even though instances exist where meanings were added
retroactively to the Zhouyi, the millenia of tradition still carries respectable
weight. This is especially true of the efforts to preserve the most reliable version
of the original text, even though recast in the Han era characters. Much more
justification is needed to emend this text than the whims the modernists use. A
simpler example of hasty generalization: the text of Gua 07, Shi, the Militia, now
contains military terminol
ogy which cannot be established to have been in use
before the time of Xuan Wang (827-787 BCE); therefore the Zhouyi could not
have been composed before this date. Even other modernist scholars admit that
this may simply have been an update made by an editor during this period.
Another problem is the inverse (not the converse) of the above, known as
the Straw Man fallacy. Misrepresent a position so that it can be attacked more
easily, knock down that misrepresented position, then conclude that the original
position has been demolished, for example: it is known that several traditionally
understood glosses to Zhouyi terms were added during the Warring States period,
therefore all traditional glosses must be scrapped.
Biased Sample is a subset of hasty generalization. This fallacy is committed
when a person draws a conclusion about a population based on a sample that is
biased or prejudiced in some manner. Many generalizations turn out to be
inaccurate because they are based on insufficient evidence. This may be most
evident in the scholars' taking references to human sacrifice on ancient oracle
bones, mostly Shang, and then making this practice out to be the center of the
ancient Chinese culture. The sample is biased due to the fact that these records
were among the only ones preserved on im perishable materials. Even if human
sacrifice was only gradually discontinued in the Zhou, and made to focus more on
war prisoners and criminals, still the modernists make it sound like it occupied a
third of the king's waking attention, the rest being devoted to agonizing over the
peasant omens and the meaning of hopping goats.
Begging the Question (a.k.a. petitio principii  or circular argumentation) is
a fallacy in which the premises include the claim that the conclusion is true or
30

(directly or indirectly) assume that the conclusion is true (assuming an answer in
the way the question is phrased). This will admit only evidence consistent with
the premises of the methodology and will avoid asking any questions about the
basic assumptions. This leads to observational selection (counting the hits and
forgetting the misses). This process yields results which must be explained or
excused instead of questioned. If a hopping goat is the result of the method then
some sort of peasant omen or ritual must be conceived wherein the hopping of
goats has a deep meaning quite literally “fit for a king.” Tautology, or circular
reasoning which begins by defining itself as true, is a contraption that is able to
bootstrap itself into any fantasy world whatsoever.
Reification (a.k.a. hypostatization) occurs whenever an abstract concept is
treated as a concrete thing. This becomes very common in the Han dynasty
apocryphal works when the structural dimensions of the Yijing, as they appear in
the Wings and later, are taken to be inherent in