are developed prior to the matrix itself, and in their
development accrue associations or correspondences which span a wide range of fields of
6

inquiry. For example, the Greek Elements of Fire, Earth, Air and Water were correlated by
Carl Jung with his Intuiting, Sensing, Thinking and Feeling types, respectively. The Scales,
in other words, conta in correlated and nested sets of analogs. The “chessboard” of the
matrix has just become three and four dimensional.
When such a matrix is then superimposed upon a spectrum of accumulated life
experiences one begins to see that some of these l ittle squares (more correctly, tessellated
cubes and hypercubes) are plenty full already, some are still relatively empty and some are
terra incognita, just begging to be explored and mapped out, or filled with invention if
necessary. The matrix has become a creative act as well as an exploratory aid. As said
before, although argument from analogy remains a logical fallacy, exploration and
investigation which makes fruitful use of analogy tends toward enrichment. The advent of
fractal geometry in chaos theory is beginning to make nested analogs both more promising
and more respectable. For example, if I want to understand why human governments tend
over generations to lose their sense of constitutional limits and overgrow their place into
parasitism, I can learn a great deal about this by investigating the smaller-scale behavior of
cancer cells in metastasis. This mode of thought was deftly demonstrated in Daniel
Goleman’s Vital Lies, Simple Truths: The Psychology of Self-Deception, and allowed his
theory to range from cellular to global scales of organization. This thought process may
have been first discussed by Herman Hesse in Magister Ludi or The Glass Bead Game.
Moving between disciplines with structural analogs is a key to interdisciplinary thinking.
Three other aspects of Correlative or Matrix Thinking bear mention here:
1) A matrix which is based upon scales intricate enough to contain a sequential order
or pattern of their own w ill tend to develop geometrical patterns o
f relationships between
spatially related elements within the matrix itself. The Ba Gong  arrangement of the Xian
Tian is definitely one of these. In fact, every single Xiang Shu dimension discussed in this
section displays bilateral symmetry when plotted onto this grid. This property will be amply,
though not completely, demonstrated in the Patterns of the Xian Tian.
2) A matrix has a mnemonic function. The “missing” content of a square may often
be deduced either from the content of the squares around it or by recourse to the higher
order of the structure which contains it (tertium non datur ). This is akin to the matrix’s
creative function but it also applies to the recall of forgotten associations.
3) A matrix gives simultaneous access to a number of concepts with a variety of
interrelationships: it offers choices within a single image. In the example of the Yijing as a
language of attitudes, the larger grid may be seen as a catalog or wardrobe of attitudes. If
being headstrong (Da Zhuang ) is cautioned against, look across the grid to one of its
resonant partners, its Inverse, Distancing (Dun) and add some “big-picture” perspective to
the attitude.
7

The Gua Ming or Hexagram Names
It may require a number of analogies to appreciate the differences between defining a
simple term and charting the full range of meanings and connotations of a Hexagram’s
Name. Ming, the word for Name, also means reputation. Old Chinese is already much more
of a connotative than a denotative or definitive language. Its smaller vocabulary is only due
to its words embodying a greater range of connections, perceptions and applications. The
set of Gua Names is like this but much more so (so some of the principles given here may
also be helpful in better understanding other examples of the Yijing’s important words and
concepts). Each name is meant to cover one part in sixty-four of the huma