latter scolding and believing in the priority of human ideas. In ancient
Greece they were Diogenes and Plato, in Western philosophy, existentialism and
essentialism. There is no solid evidence of a strong involvement by either one of
these men with the Zhouyi text. Much is made of two citations in the Lunyu, The
Analects of Kongfuzi, written by followers after his death. The first, at VII, 16, is
the oft-quoted claim that, if he had but fifty more years to live, he w ould spend
them in study of the Yi, and thereby avoid great errors. The copy containing this
version is now generally said to be less reliable than the one which reads study,
comma. The second, at X III, 22, appears to be a quotation from the Zhouyi’s
chapter 32, Heng. But it is just as likely that the statement in both texts derived
from a third source in the broader culture. There is also an anecdote relating that
Kongfuzi used the Yi so frequently that he wore out the thong bindings on his
copy three times. The counter-argument is that, had he done so, he w ould have
become more wise.
The period of the Eastern Zhou which followed Spring and Aut umn, from
476 to 221, is known as the Warring States Period, and it is well-named: the fiefs
around the sovereign’s domain became city-states and states, and the supreme
sovereignty was arrogated by rulers in several regions. What the name does not
imply, however, is that this was a golden age for philosophy. It
 was during this
period that Zou Yan (305-240) integrated the two centuries-old idea-streams of
Yin-and-Yang and the Wu Xing , or Five Agents, to form the Yinyang J ia, or the
Yinyang School. The followers of Kongfuzi (who used only the first of these two
streams) began to speculate on the deeper layers and nature of the Zhouyi. They
were joined by the early Daoists who offered numerous counterpoints. The end
product of this speculation, which at current best guess took final written form in
the third and second centuries, is known as the Shi Yi, Ten Wings or Appendices
(this yi means wing) to the Zhouyi. Kongfuzi was given credit for authorship of
the Wings, but now even his participation in the endeavor is considered unlikely.
Several of the candidates for Wing authorship are to be found among Kongfuzi’s
successors: Tian He, Wang Tung, Wang Zhong, Zhou Wangsun, Ding Kuan and
Fu Sheng. These Wings were to become attached to the Zhouyi, and accompany
the older work on its journey through the millenia. In 136 BCE, the two would be
canonized together as a single classic work, The Yijing, or the Book of C hanges.
Jing means book, but especially a classic book, or canon. Thus, the name Yijing
refers both to the larger text and to the longer period of composition.
The first two Wings are in fact a single work, known as the Tuan Zhuan or
Commentary on the Judgments (the Tuan or Gua Ci). The division between the
two parts is made for the sake of text length only; it has no other meaning. In this
commentary, attempts are made to expound on the overt and hidden meanings of
the Gua Ci. Sometimes this is a simple elaboration or gloss on quoted words and
larger portions of the text. Sometimes it will launch into original insight, thought
498

and poetic expression. And sometimes it will attempt a structural analysis of the
Gua, and the relationships between its individual Lines and Trigrams. It is in this
attempt at structural analysis in regard to the individual Lines where it has the
least success, although the work has some, if fewer, shortcomings in other areas as
well. The problem here is that the authors of the Tuan Zhuan thought they saw
certain hidden structural dimensions behind or beneath the text, which were in
fact reflections of their own methods of exegesis, and the skeletal structure of
their own newly-constructed algorithms. Several hidden structures do in fact
exist behind the text: these were often the primary source of the verbal images, as
will be made clearer in Dimensions. And even these added dimension