prolonged?
He sits on his porch, watching the sun set, dimming his mood with the darkening
light, sighing: Yea, the sun must go down, and so all that I am must also go down.
He’s going gently and fading fast and soon will be a burden. It is truly unfortunate
to fail to see all of this gold, and not bounce some of it back with a livelier response.
He is still young enough to not know this age, to bang on his kettles and pots and
sing his fool head off. Instead, he groans pitifully like a man in his eighties. Might
he be running a fever here, heating his being to get rid of some foreign thing, such
as a thought badly timed? Could he think this day’s light has grown old and rotten?
To the east and the west a new day dawns, saying goodbye to the stars now coming
his way. Why not enjoy today’s blessings now? Savor death and decrepitude later.
30.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.4: pure white, winged horse, a suitor, not a robber)
What a breakthrough this one’s arrival appears!
What a blaze!
What an ending!
What a waste …
30.4x What a breakthrough this one’s arrival appears:
(But) having no place to fit in
His coming is sudden and dazzling, flaming and swift, like a meteor. An otherwise
placid tableau is brilliantly lit for a moment. The crowds in attendance go wild with
frenzied applause. Word spreads of the next spectacular thing. Then he uses up all
of his resource and substance, flames up and dies out in darkness. The crowds now
return to their various lives, with only a dim recollection of seeing a lovely, bright
light somewhere. The theater’s senile custodian comes plodding across the stage
to sweep up the ashes, whistling absently. So much for the flaming success, or the
meteoric rise, or flames using nothing more solid than glamour for fuel. What then
was the purpose of this? Will one great showing redeem a whole life? Were there
pretty women to please? Great matters fuel great flames: seek fuel, not bri ghtness.
236

30.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.5: tears into laughter, armies entertain each other)
Gushing tears, streaming like water
What grief and lament!
Good fortune!
30.5x Six fifth’s good fortune:
A departure from sovereign (and) patriarch
He takes on the world’s great sorrows, the suffering, craving, blindness and waste,
the failure of his own human kind to wake up and enkindle each other, and the most
stubborn will with which humans cling to their ignorance, while everyone gnaws on
everyone else, and all of those organizations we had so much hope for just turn into
cancers and parasites. Not much to cheer up the lone soul. But every great one, and
every bright light, will have many nights as dark as this one and will waste a lot of
tears on things which will be transcended. Relief is on the way, as the tears will clean
the eyes. They come through these nights with dawning awareness of fuel beyond
wildest dream and reasons to shine today: if not you, then who, if not now, when?
Light which learns is power. The suffering is optional, but swamp gas burns as well.
30.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.6: screening self and family, three years not seen)
The sovereign takes advantage of emergencies to expedite
There will be commendations
And severed heads
The captives were never his enemies
Not a mistake
30.6x The sovereign takes advantage of emergencies to expedite:
In order to set right the domain
Triumph comes at last at the end of a long, bloody struggle, a moment of truth and
reckoning, as well as a happy occasion. There is much of what had gone wrong to
be set right here today. The Lord will demand a few severed heads, the same heads
which should have seen this day coming. But beyond this are the new tasks at hand
and now he needs all the help he can get from those he now stands above. With all
the bigger tyrants now gone, the only half-innocent followers and failures at being
effectively guilty are pardoned. This is the worst time for resentment an