ise (her) young:
Losing her own way
* Worthwhile (and) productive to guard against predators:
Responding (by) protecting each other
He flies to the rugged plateau and beyond, seeking out greater purpose and drama.
On vigorous wings, thinking of heaven, our gander gets lost somewhere above the
high desert, where even few trees can survive. Alas, he is not smart enough to live
like a raven. Being headstrong is not this bird’s strength. This is a better home for
wild ideas. Meanwhile, his mate leaves the nest to forage for food and the predator
snatches the cold eggs and goslings. This is why most of the geese who will carry
their bloodline forward carry the trait of fidelity and continue their old proven ways.
When our higher purpose involves continuing life, we’ll subordinate our other plans
and care for these priorities in something like proper order. These wild, bird-brained
schemes, the barren and fruitless impulses, only miscarry successful continuance.
53.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.4: noble's elective retreat, common people deny)
The wild goose advances by degrees to the trees
Perchance to find that flat branch
No harm done
53.4x Perchance to find that flat branch:
Accepting in order to adapt
Making still greater headway, the wild goose wings onward towards the great tree
high on the mountain. What a fine and exalted place to rest! Imagine a goose with
a view fit for eagles! But of course his ambitions are tempered, he knows he is not
a raptor. There is no harm in trying, no blame if he stumbles, if he has his fallback
position, his fallback plan being his nod to co nservative thinking. Perching in trees
is no easy thing when all you can grip with is floppy, webbed feet, even without the
strong winds here. These gnarly, old trees will seldom grow flat or regular branches.
He circles around in search of a perch, perchance to find that branch that does not
belong here as he doesn’t either. And if he cannot find his purchase up high here
he can still always waddle around on the hill. Not very right is not always wrong.
374

53.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.5: stilling those jawbones, words will have order)
The wild geese advance by degrees to higher ground
The wife is three years without conceiving
In the end nothing overcomes her
Promising
53.5x In the end, nothing overcomes her good fortune:
Securing a home for hope
Our gander has waited a third of his life to find this young goose by his side. His
routine was just impressive enough and her honking had just the right tone. They
can finally un-steady their flight and do their great aerial dance. Goose and gander
consummate and play for a day or two. But then they move back to those practical
matters, social adjustments and seasonal cycles, the plans to cross the great waters
and designs for just the right nest. Aging seems to take ages, but the time, when  it’s
allowed to keep going, will eventually come around. Problems which earlier had no
solution, when all of the pieces just were not there yet, seem to resolve themselves.
Those delays were not setbacks here, there were just a lot of steps to take forward.
The unconceived and unhatched dreams now have a world to live and grow up in.
53.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.6: if going impassable, coming back is maturity)
The wild geese advance by degrees across the highlands
Their feathers are worthy to use in performing the sacred dance
Auspicious
53.6x (That) their feathers (are) worthy to use
(In) performing the sacred dance (is) promising:
Not likely to be distracted
The formation of geese in the sky has grown gradually smaller and smaller, as they
slowly ascend beyond the cloud heights and over the far horizon. The steady pace
has lasted, and persistence has furthered them vastly. Before they were just a flock
of birds, but now they have gone beyond, become one with that grandest mystery.
Even the goose gets to heaven.* The humans stuck on the ground, watching these