at a time. Coherence, persistence of order, is no great rule
directing heaven or all of the powers that be. Keeping order is life’s little challenge.
71

03.M, Key Words
Struggle, difficult beginning, birth/growth/early/first trials, frustration, confusion
Needing assistance, reinforcement, concentration, coherence, pulling (it) together
Fallback, triage, retrenchment, regrouping, muster; to minimize loss, hold/bear up
Prioritizing, consolidating a position, using reserves; the write off, the rainy day
Courtship metaphor for confusion, frustration and turmoil; young sprout as Zhen
Frustrated anticipation, the loss of unhatched chickens, the linearity of expectation
03.G, From the Glossary
Zhun1 (to) rally, muster, collect (together), store up, bank (up), assemble, accum-
ulate, pull together, bring together, summon (help), congregate, secure; need help,
need assistance, struggle, sprout, start (out) small (s, ed, ing); (to be) in difficulty,
in need of (help, assistance), sparing, hard, difficult; (a, the) village, congregation,
camp, rally, initial difficulty, difficult start, birth pains, early trials, rites of pas-
sage; a single blade of grass, bending and twisting; (to consolidate gains while
cutting losses); to garrison or station soldiers; also pronounced Tun2.
03.T, Tuan Zhuan
Rallying
The firm (and) the flexible begin to interact and so (come) the trials of new life
Moving through the heart of risk
Much fulfillment (means) persistence
Thunder (and) rain’s activity abounds to excess
The sky creates in haste (and) obscurity
(It is) necessary to enlist delegates, but not (in order) to relax
72

03.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
(Fan Yao 08.1: being true overtops vessel, even more promise)
Cliffs all around
Worthwhile to maintain resolve
Worthwhile to enlist delegates
03.1x Even with cliffs all around
The objective to make progress (is) correct
* By respecting the lowly (and) disregarded
The great gain humanity
Life’s road was recently so full of promise, then it showed itself to be a dead end.
Echoes are sending mixed signals, the crowded horizon might as well be a maze.
Where terrain is not mapped or charted, wrong turns are not a mistake, and yet
they still need some fixing. It begins with getting the lay of the land, mapping the
options, charting a course: tasks not done while forging ahead with great strides
and pushy ideas. You could even stop and ask for directions, or follow the water
downstream to get out, or follow your own footsteps back. All suggest that humility
saves time and trouble. Maintaining resolve is not always maintaining direction.
Sometimes the course is defined, the givens are a ‘take that.’ Whether humbled
by choice or making bad choices, if humility leads to success it is not a lesser idea.
03.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
Fan Yao 60.2: not beyond courtyard gate, disappointing
It seems like needing assistance is the same as turning back
A team of four horses arrayed alike
Not an adversary but a marital suitor*
The woman, of tender years, is resolved: no babies
Ten years, then babies
03.2x Six second has difficulties
Overcoming resolve
* Ten years, then babies:
Revise the rules
He thought that the hard part was over, once he and his horses were ready to go.
His team is assembled and his presence majestic. He will sweep her from her feet.
So he holds his breath, paces and waits for a sign. And tries not to look like a fool.
Just what is he courting here? He keeps a tight hold on those horses, and ponders
this a bit longer, and envies the robber who can be more straightforward and also
even less welcome. There are affairs best put in order by not beginning them yet,
and sides to some situations that call for perceptions broader than those of a fool
on love’s errands. Does he want strings and tangles to sort? In a state of mind with
warp and weft so confused? With implications and complications: the rules are on
the run here. Recover ten years in advance: let them go and head back to n