d a little. We discover ourselves in reactions, and some of us learn from these.
We’re wired to be awakened by the novel and unfamiliar, and we’re often just put to
sleep by what is known. But isn’t it odd how apprehension to some means anxiety,
and to others means getting a grip or grasp? Awe to some is awful, and yet to others
it’s a high form of reverence. The latter perhaps know change as something needed,
stimulation to keep life and knowledge fresh, something to jolt us awake, shock us
out of our slumber and daydreams. The learning here will favor one who is ready.
51.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.2: one-eyed can see, rewarding recluse’s resolve)
The shock comes with adversity
A hundred thousand times one loses possessions
And scrambles up the nine hills
To not give chase
Means seven days to gain
51.2x The shock comes with adversity:
Rely upon firmness
A stimulus as potent as this will offer him great knowledge, of and about his values.
He might be left with no choice but to leave his belongings behind him and climb up
the nine hills to safety. His alarm may be true or false, but his motion, with what ever
he chooses to carry out, is real. What he is in truth, that developing flame within, will
be destroyed only once in each lifetime. But what he thinks he might be, by equating
himself with all those beliefs and belongings, could be tested, abused and destroyed
one hundred thousand times. Driven into the hills, he tries to rise above it all, up and
out of harm’s way, and look philosophically down. Things that he truly needs will
be restored within seven days, simply because he cannot live without them, while the
things not replaced are not needed. This tests not his worth but his worth’s worth.
361

51.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.3: abundant banners, noon stardust, break right arm)
The shock awakens and revives
Be excited to movement instead of distress
51.3x The shock awakens (and) revives:
The position (was) not appropriate
Shock comes and it leaves him distraught and confounded. Perhaps he thinks that
the sky shouts at him in some unknowable tongue, with some kind of rage or fury.
Thunder does not care about him. What he may do in response is a choice, which
gives human meaning to thunder. Indulgence in his fear will leave him numb and
exposed, like a bug waking up in the cold, without wit or useful reaction. A bolder
stance will find ways to steal the thunder, to put it to a better use and to turn the fear
into courage and strength. This thunder can be a great wake up call, exhilarating and
quickening. We might allow the thunder to take us, but forward instead of aback.
We allow it to drive us, but we still do the guiding. We can let it shake out our worst
and bring out our best. But first we must maintain our center of balance and gravity.
51.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.4: walking in the middle, all alone in return)
The shock is followed by muddledness
51.4x The shock (is) followed by muddledness:
Less than exemplary
Sinking deeper into shock, not even thunder excites him to movement. This was all
too much to take charge from. Now would he plant himself in the wet earth, like a
tuber, and bear only fungus for fruit, rather than keep his sense alive and respond to
more wild reality. Now he insulates himself and tries to dull his senses, that all nasty
shock might be muted. But this is more taxing and deadly than facing raw power  
and staying awake for more. To enter a state of shock in response to a wound can
kill where the injury fails. When one’s will to go on living is tied to one’s fortune in
life, it will be dragged all over the place. Power should be hunted or stolen instead.
Even a misfortune can be considered fair game. Great stimulus wants a more worthy
response than a lost will to live. A stunned acceptance is not a great way to accept.
362

51.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.5: trusting in excellence, promisin