the conflict or contest, but that mastery requires fin-
ding the middle way. A few of the images used in the commentary derive from the
martial art known as Aikido.
06, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yesod in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Nine of Swords
* Astrology: Luna in Air
06, Quotations
* One more such victory and we are lost. —Pyrrhus
* If there were a verb meaning “to believe falsely”,  it would not have any
significant first person, present indicative. —Wittgenstein
* I am bound to furnish my antagonists with arguments, but not with
comprehension. —Benjamin Disraeli
* But what convinces us is not necessarily true- it is merely convincing-
a note for  asses. —Nietzsche, WTP
* Convictions are more dangerous enemies of the truth than lies. —Nietzsche
* A man who is doing his true will has the inertia of the universe to assist him.
—Crowley, Magick in Theory and Practice
* We owe almost all our knowledge not to those who have agreed, but to those
who have differed. —Charles Caleb Colton
* Pick battles big enough to matter, small enough to win. —Jonathan Kozol
* Don't take the wrong side of an argument just because your opponent has taken
the right side. —Baltasar Gracian
94

GUA 07, SHI1, THE MILITIA
 
  Binary 010 000 = 16; Kan below, Kun above
07.X,  Overall Image
Within the earth there is water
The militia
The noble young one, accordingly,
Is tolerant towards the people
And cares for the multitude
A wealth of hidden reserves, like water deep in the ground. The land might seem dry,
but the harvest’s potential is already here. The people might seem defenseless, but
more dangerous arms and armor are cached close at hand, awaiting the rallying cry.
A wise leader will nourish his people and help them to train their abilities, holding
most of their resources hidden and most of their strength in reserve as able, healthy,
good-hearted people. But as they are called upon, a number of forms can be filled
on demand: liquidity becomes solidarity. The wrong leader will keep them standing,
out in the open, divided and conquered, unaware of problems and tyrants at home.
07.0, The militia*
Persistence
A mature person’s good fortune
No blame
Imagine the perfect village, peaceful and prosperous, from a bandit’s point of view.
To the extent that life is good it may need to be defended, safe in its many scenarios,
with resources, means and wherewithal arranged for multiple uses, ready to adapt,
with both strength and wealth secured by a healthy diversity. But all of this attention
paid to being secure is best if gone when not needed, leaving only a small contingent
of vigilant ones to watch the gates and horizons, set to emerge in emergencies only,
and not just standing by, rattling swords. To have one of merit on point, one worthy
to call upon loyalties, means the difference between militia and mob. There are long
standing reasons why there will not be one vote for each man here, why merit leads
when life is at stake. Who would be eager to kill, or ready to die for the cause when
life itself is the cause? Would that all states were ad hoc like this and sunset all laws
when done and go home. This can refer to one person as well, a mature one taken as
model, a pool of resources, a population of selves, the readiness of a one’s reserves
to meet the time’s conditions. Persistence means discipline and discipline, maturity.
95

07.M, Key Words
Ready reserves, liquidity, solvency, mobile and fungible assets, resourcefulness
Interdependence, collective force, strength in numbers, coalition, solidarity, allies
Instruction, discipline, training, regimen; planning for contingency, preparedness
Hedging, strategic security, expedience; chain of command based on merit or skill
Guardians, host; multiple uses of resources, the masses used as reservoir or pool
A defensive army disguised as a people, an ad hoc army or a grass-roots militia
07.G, From the Glossary
shi1 (a, the) militia, military, reserves, army, armies, host, hosts, legion(s), troops,
garrison; general, master,