ion, or introspect our
friends away, but when we would live in the actual world and know just what we are
capable of, we revisit this axis and learn. Wanting this world, as it is, makes it ours.
369

52, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 58, Dui, Satisfaction
qian gua (inverse): 51, Zhen, Arousal
jiao gua (reverse): 52, Gen, Stillness (chong gua 1)
hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
52, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Assiah of Assiah
* Tarot: Princess of Pentacles
* Astrology: Caput Draconis in Earth
52, Quotations
* How beautiful it is to do nothing, and then rest afterward. —Spanish proverb
* This quietness
The shrilling of cicadas
Stabs into the rocks. —Basho
* First there is no mountain
then there is no mountain
then there is. —Zen lore, adapted by Donovan
* And believe me, friend Hullaballoo! The greatest events are not our noisiest but
our stillest hours. Not around the inventors of new noise, but around the inventors
of new values doth the world revolve; inaudibly it revolveth.
—Nietzsche, TSZ #40
* Nothing is often a good thing to say, and always a clever thing to say.
—Will Durant
* Besides the noble art of getting things done, there is the noble art of leaving
things undone. The wisdom of life consists in the elimination of nonessentials.
—Lin Yutang
* All human evil comes from a single cause, man's inability to sit still in a room.
—Blaise Pascal
370

GUA 53, JIAN4, GRADUAL PROGRESS
 
  Binary 001 011 = 11; Gen below, Xun above
53.X, Overall Image
On top of the mountain there is a tree
Gradual progress
The noble young one, accordingly,
abides in excellence and character to raise the social norms
In strong and steady winds the tree up on the mountain grows slowly, keeping still
and adapting to its place. By imperceptible steps, the young sprout fashions itself
into a wizened and gnarly old tree, well developed and firmly rooted. Haste in this
climate will not grow strong roots; one would battle the winds and lose. Landmarks
do not fly. Adapting to the forms it is given to live with, like paths of least resistance,
the little green root takes years, but it finally splits the boulder in two and makes it
an anchor. It becomes an inspiration. Others won’t grow by pulling their branches,
so the sage considers the use of example and cultivates consistency in his character.
53.0, Gradual Progress
The young woman’s engagement is promising
Worth the persistence
Following years of engagement, the maiden is ready at last to call the young man
her husband and make an even longer commitment. After growing steadily closer,
strictly according to the ways of their kind, the wild geese mate for life, and their
family begins with a pair. Their signals are clear and flight is in order. In due time,
with patience, formalities and necessities, the good nest is made and young goslings
begin to arrive. Tradition, custom and time-tested methods lay down the protocols,
all the little details, and lots and more lots of givens. Few geese can simply wing it.
Progress follows the pace of approved success, not many move at their own pace.
Patience makes progress that lasts and builds on it self, one day’s growth at a time,
and one year’s growth every year. Keeping still and penetrating makes the surest
progress. Needs are carefully mated to the situations at hand. As sunlight, wind,
water and earth slowly take form in a living, intelligent wood, the small things are
added, tested, adjusted and built upon. Like migratory plans, personal expressions
are little more than variations on a theme. Cultures also remember average success.
371

53.M, Key Words
Advancing by degrees, steadiness of pace, thoroughness, reliability, consistency
Constancy, tenacity, endurance; procedures to f ollow, proceedings, conventions
Incremental growth, maturation, development; a longer process, one day at a time
Accommodation, patience, meeting criteria of place, due process, rites, protocol
Wild goose as symbol for long-term fidelity