e service,
he doesn’t give anything up. These are the steps on his path, this is exactly the life
he has asked for, the price he has chosen to pay. The very nature of his position is a
hard look at the nature of sacrifice. To be blunt, this is often no more than greed in
its sanctified form, although the best will say thanks for what little they have, and
not please for how much they want. A sage will be wary of this and true to himself.
He cannot give up his spark to serve in his cause: he needs his center and all of his
strength for the blessing, before making anything sacred. To be happy with getting
your basic needs met will set you free to lose without losing and gain without risk.
301

41.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.3: fine horse, daily training, having a place to go)
Three people set out
And in due order lose one member
A single person sets out
And in due order finds a companion
41.3x One person sets out:
The third gives rise to uncertainties
Decrease and increase might only be ways for us to look backwards, to describe the
behavior of excess and lack, as derivatives, out of the larger dimensions of change.
They are only ideas, confined to short spans of time, they are not homes to dwell in.
When thoughts and deeds repeat more than once, the third one is already searching,
reaching for novel experience and then for the next confirmation. In these lean times
this reaching for more may be no more than untimely distraction. The way things
behave implies a way being followed. The rule here might be that the odd w ill try
to get even. Two half-full bowls can together pretend to be plenty, but three suggest
a new bowl. Two of the three get a break from the oddness, and one who goes finds
a companion. More is not always merrier when what we need now is to concentrate.
41.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 38: Kui, Estrangement
(Fan Yao 38.4: estranged, meet someone unique, share trust)
Decreasing those sufferings
To take charge and expedite becomes happiness
This is not a mistake
41.4x Decreasing those sufferings:
Truly asking for happiness
Sometimes what we prize beyond all else are the pains of our being so very special,
our passions for sorrows and failings, our bondage to weakness and ills. These are
greatly valued as treasures, and highly regarded as pets. They bring the neighbors
around to help out. They give conversations a place to begin. Friends like to scratch
the ears of the ones with sad, little faces. A good illness can keep our friends busy
for days. Many are the strange relations between the artist and his form of abuse.
One’s troubles are not dismissed lightly. But such suffering is optional and sanity
grows elsewhere. It might be fine if one has time and nothing better to do. But this
wants too much maintenance now. What better things to give up than the burdens,
and sources of loss and exhaustion? Some selective predation will better the species.
302

41.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.5: being true is as good as bond, make no mistakes)
Somebody grants one ten matched  pairs of tortoise shells
One cannot refuse
Outstanding opportunity
41.5x Six fifth’s outstanding opportunity:
Assistance from above
You perform what you think a small sacrifice, then you reap an enormous reward.
Yet one who is increased in wealth is only given the task of guarding the way wealth
will dwindle. There is no such thing as a wealth which stands still and alone. For the
shells to give up their omens, one shell at a time is heated up, cracked and destroyed,
becoming quite useless for anything else. Intact, they were useful only for turtles.
Even gold by itself just has weight, takes up space and colors the light a bit yellow.
Would you put cracks in these shells just to question your fortune? Their value is
in their spending, in losing them to your own best advantage. If you already knew
this, and it was known that you knew this, then perhaps the one who gave them up
knew they would not b