m was irresistable.
* 44.2 The fish symbol usually refers to the unfair sex, although nobody has ever
figured out the two reasons why. Anyone who has read the speculative history
here knows that I think that women were well represented among the Wu Xian
(congress of shamans) who authored the Yi. I also think that the authors had a
healthy and well-developed sense of humor.
44, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Hod in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Eight of Swords (an amusingly similar image)
* Astrology: Mercury in Air
44, Quotations
* It is easier to stay out than get out. —Mark Twain
* She’s the sort of woman who lives for others - you can tell the others by their
hunted expression. —C. S. Lewis
* How savage is love that plants a flower and uproots a field; that revives us for a
day and stuns us for an age. —Kahlil Gibran
* No temptation can ever be measured by the value of its object. —Goethe
* One cannot ascribe the most basic and primeval activities of protoplasm to a
will to self-preservation, for it takes into itself absurdly more than would be
required to sustain it; and, above all, it does not thereby preserve itself, it falls
apart - the drive that rules here has to explain precisely this absence of desire for
self-preservation. —Nietzsche, WTP #651
* Nothing ever really sets human nature free but self-control. —Phyllis Bottome
* O woman, perfect woman! what distraction
Was meant to mankind when thou wast made a devil! —John Fletcher
* For the most part we allow only outlying and transient circumstances to make
our occasions. They are, in fact, the cause of our distraction.
—Henry David Thoreau
322

GUA 45, CUI4, COLLECTEDNESS
 
  Binary 000 110 = 06; Kun below, Dui above
45.X, Overall Image
The pond is raised above the earth
Collectedness
The noble young one, accordingly,
puts aside weapons and instruments
Guarding against unreadiness
A reservoir  on top of the earth, held in place by our efforts, will offer us respite and
sanctuary, a gathering ground for our waters along their way to the sea. If the banks
are secure and the inlets welcome water, fulfillment becomes overflow. Erosion will
be the more natural state: wear and tear on our confidence. Maintaining our sense of
security, a level of collectedness, is work for our kind, alone or in groups. In good
repair we stand ready and worthy to receive. But the object here is to get on with life.
Too much can be surrendered for common grounds and waters. We’ll want to stay
able to hold our waters together, but not so dammed up that we can't come and go.
45.0, Collectedness
Fulfillment
The sovereign approaches his temple
Rewarding to encounter a mature human being
Making an offering
Worthwhile to be dedicated
To offer great sacrifices is promising
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
The cup is emptied and cleaned, in order to receive the new. The sovereign repairs to
the shrine of his ancestors, with a prayer to come back infused with new strength,
to face his people and heirs. To create and maintain these tribal and cultural bonds,
a security in numbers, is a radial point of his work and the focal point of his people.
The great man brings the great offering. We hope that he understands here that the
great sacrifice is not the great man himself, but only his self-importance. The king is
the supplicant here. His sacrifice is made for a common good. Unity is an immense
reward, security for the tribe, cohesion for the realm. What is this sacrifice worth?
Answer these first: A unity of what? Dedicated to what? These shared lives remain
individual lives, held together by choices. The unity in a flock of sheep will serve the
shepherd well, and those who want mutton and wool. But what is called the common
good will not always serve the sheep. His reasons for the gathering here may not be
the reason for its success. The greatest gift you can offer the ancestors is to become
a great one yourself. This isn’t done by giving up too much, certainly not the center.
323

45.M, Key Words
Gather together, assemb