it. Thunder leaps
from the flame and the heat makes immediate movement, be it in or out of control.
The boom brings it all too much to life. The roads of the busy s ociety come alive
from dawn until dark. The demands of the thriving economy press in a gainst all of
the options. Many are lost amidst the complex of rites which attend the advancing
culture and its economy, but the young noble can still resolve conflicts and allocate
force with strict precision, by giving structure to his vision and ignoring whatever
he can. He cuts though confusion with force and clarity, direction and orientation.
55.0, Abundance
Fulfillment
The sovereign approaches this
Do not be anxious
It suits the sun to be at midday
To take full advantage of prosperous times, the lightning speed of the sovereign’s
executive judgment is needed. Only a moment will pass between decisions and their
execution. This is not a time for committees. Command cannot sit and ponder, or
jabber on about ramifications. Today is the autocrat’s day, either to shine or else to
prove himself dull. Of course, high noon means the sun is soon to decline, just as
great wealth and power today become myth and momentum tomorrow. This is no
reason not to jump at this chance. To mourn the fall before the glory is to get out
of place with one’s timing and lose one’s presence of mind. What you wished for
is here right now, and of course it’s a little too much. Most of the real world now
might be no more than distraction, and choosing what to postpone or ignore means
assessing things quickly for what they might be worth. This in its turn means clear
and useful values. To not waste this day will mean sorting much of it out once it’s
over, when one has time to be grateful for breath, and even a little decline in one’s
rate of success, as relief from this storm of activity. To make the most, keep little.
383

55.M, Key Words
Busyness, hustle, confusion, crowding, overcommitment; a culmination or zenith
Prosperity, affluence, riches, profusion, confusion, multiple choices, complexity
Information or sensory overload; immediacy, urgency; maximum, peak, climax
Call for dispatch, executive decision, selection, focus, summary or snap judgment
Tunnel vision of daytime stars a.k.a. polarized light; curtains, tall buildings, maze
Many demands on the attention, awareness narrowly apportioned, circumscription
55.G, From the Glossary
feng1 (a, the) abundance, prosperity, affluence, riches, plenty, profusion; (to be
)
(so) abundant, luxurious (-iant), prosperous, bountiful, prolific, ample, copious,
sumptuous, ripe, plentiful, full, thick (that), filled, fulfilled; (to) abound in,
prosper in, proliferate (s, ed, ing); fully
55.T, Tuan Zhuan
Abundance
(Means) greatness
Intelligence (is) behind movement
Given this, abundance
The sovereign approaches this:
Appreciate the greatness
Do not be anxious, (it) suits the sun (to be at) midday:
Appropriate for illuminating all under heaven
The sun (at) midday, in due order, goes down
The moon (at) full, in due order, (is) consumed
(If) heaven (and) earth fill up (and) empty out
In accord with the time (in both) waning (and) waxing
Then how much more true for humanity!
(And) how much more true for the ghosts and the spirits!
384

55.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness in Excess
(Fan Yao 62.1: a flying bird on the way to misfortune)
Meeting one’s match or superior
Even for a long week,* no harm is done
To continue has merit
55.1x Even for a long week, no error:
To exceed the long week (means) disaster
During the fast moving times, in the times of the greatest abundance, with urgencies
everywhere, even a mere ten moments are precious in value. The prince wants his
facts with their edges still sharp, his truths rough hewn and provisional, unpolished
by winds of time. His people are on their feet and thinking, not down on their knees
mouthing platitudes. Yet, in the midst of all of this, whatever demands there may be,
when you meet a mate or a colleague, a mentor