nd to.
58.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 17: Sui, Following
(Fan Yao 17.2: bound to little child, giving up one of maturity)
Trusting joy
Promising
Regrets pass
58.2x Trusting joy holds promise:
A belief (in) the purpose
Joy is a subject. To have faith in an object of joy, and hang one’s hopes thereupon,
will teach us that joy, unlike faith, is no nun. She will sleep with the saint one night
and then run off with a shaman or witch. She plays the field far too well, loving both
faith and uncertainty. For her, this is a wonderful world to be so worldly in. But to
count upon joy or happiness, perhaps as our reward for being so well-behaved, is to
ask for mental illness. To even think to keep her at home is vexation itself. We look
for joy to affirm our convictions, or to tell us that we are on the right path. She is a
fine omen indeed, and sometimes she may even come when she’s wanted, but this
is not proof of merit or worth. To leave the doors open is sometimes all we can do,
focus on our work to keep ourselves worthy, and not whine when an episode ends.
403

58.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao 43.3: vigor in cheeks, presuming worst, alone in rain)
Future joy
Disappointing
58.3x Future joy holds disappointment:
The position is not appropriate
A pool or a pond begins with some kind of depression, hollow, waiting for fullness.
And truly much can be said for deferring gratification. But joy is never tomorrow;
always or never sometimes, when hijacked by emotions, or past, if being nostalgic,
or right now as it is happening. When saving up for great joys to come, we empty
our hearts till it hurts, the better to suck the joys in. Then we’ll try to be idle, saving
ourselves for the time, dismissing the lesser, more worldly joys, keeping busy with
distractions, indulging in things that kill time. Our time will be dead soon enough.
If the joy we await takes much time to respond, it will find us too weak to embrace it.
Waiting for one great ship to come in, one can miss two ships worth of rowboats.
The poor souls who await their heaven to live will not have a clue what to do there.
58.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 60: Jie, Boundaries
(Fan Yao 60.4: content with the boundaries, fulfillment)
Measured joy is less than serene
Limit the anxiety to own happiness
58.4x Nine fourth’s happiness:
There will be rewards
He contrives to collect and examine one of each kind of pleasure. His journals are
marked up with assorted descriptions and symbols, ratings for health and intensity.
He speaks cleverly, and at length, on topics of pleasure. He knows which joys are
high and most sacred and which are low and profane, and can list, in proper order,
all of those in between. And of course he suffers from assorted small ills attendant
upon such anxious reflection, and the naggings of choices forgone. He makes it all
so complex, with all of this fussing and fretting. But, that being said, there is a due
and optimum order to arranging one’s satisfactions: to take care of the basic needs
first, that they don’t turn into deficiencies, or problems of mental health. Then we
move on to life’s finer wants and fulfillments, such as jumping naked into the lake.
404

58.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 54: Gui Mei, Little Sister’s Marriage
(Fan Yao 54.5: Lord Yi’s daughter’s dress unequal to her maids’)
Trusting in the unsustainable
There will be struggles
58.5x Trusting in the unsustainable:
(Though) the position (is) correct (and) appropriate
Unconditional love and acceptance, a compassion for all living things, did not make
the world we know. The beauty we see around us, the health that we enjoy, the set
of senses we use to know this life and the wits to make our lives work, only exist
because our world is ever renewed as the unfit are swept from existence. The loving
and nurturing mothers in nature might kill and eat the runts of their litters to spare
the rest from diseases. Compassion is still a good thing, and a heart ought not judge
or choose, but denying selection is mindless, and