n inquiry on
several newsgroups in search of some favorite examples. I was a little shocked to
learn that, while many long-time readers had had several humorous coincidences
and encounters with the Yijing, very few saw any intentional humor buried in the
text itself. A few, particularly those belonging to Modernist or twitching captives
school, were quite openly hostile to the idea.
Indeed, very few systems of thought or belief have acknowledged humor
as a special state of mind and made an honored place for it in their doctrines. Only
three of the world's "religions" come to mind: Daoism, Zen and Sufism. All three of
these seem to be deeply concerned with the resolution of paradox, of which
spontaneous laughter is often the consequence. E lsewhere, humor seems to be
more of a threat than a promise. When Abraham was called to test his faith in
YHVH he was asked to sacrifice his son Isaac as proof. Care to guess what the
name Isaac meant when the story was written? Laughter. The coexistence of
belief (or dedication) and humor is often the most difficult paradox of all to
resolve. Just ask anyone who has followed their love of the lighthearted lore of
Zen into a Zen monastery - this can be a bitter, cold shock, at least until you can
get the Roshi alone.
Humor was making its way into Greek art and literature by the 5th century
BCE and it was fully at home there by the time of Aristophanes. But humor had
appeared long before this, on cave walls and in Egyptian hieroglyphics. It cannot
be that people did not laugh yet. As to the China of the Early Zhou, it may be
argued that the serious m atters faced by the royal court could not permit such
foolishness, especially where there were questions of war and such. But doesn't
this call to mind the royal courts of old Europe, where the court jester or fool had
the ability to make the king laugh at just the right moment? And how  many lives
might this have saved? There would of course have been serious constraints on
the Zhouyi authors - it would not be at all wise to offend or insult the king or his
court. The authors, even in jest, were not pure fools - wherever such seeds were
to be planted, there would need to be a little ambiguity, a lot of subtlety, some
back doors to escape through and plenty of "plausible deniability." Otherwise the
work would face censorship whenever a king took offence. As such, it is always
very easy to see the serious side of even the funniest Zhouyi line.
I need to call upon my personal experience with the hum or of shamans in
their more “primitive” versions of the societal role of counselor or mental health
worker. These people have cracked me up too often to ignore this. This proves
nothing, but it prepares me to accept humor as a deliberately applied treatment, or
a therapy. The Sufis have mastered this as w ell, and use it with a kind of surgical
precision to treat human ignorance (of the divine) as a disease. The understanding
of laughter as medicine has even gained a wide acceptance in professional circles
and claims of its effectiveness is backed up by a statistically significant number of
550

statistical studies. Humor will usually involve being jerked suddenly out of our
previous state of mind (more on this shortly). In anxiety or neurosis, it is the
"thing which we do not understand" which is obscured by our life within t hese
mindsets, expectations or frames of reference as mental confines. In subjects for
divination, the "thing that I am just not seeing" will often demand nothing more
than a new mindset, expectation or frame of reference. This is humor's home turf.
Before you say something that might offend another person, it is always a
good idea to first walk a mile in their shoes. That way, if they take offence to
what you say, you are already a mile away. Plus you have their shoes.
Most humor, whether rude and crude or refined and witty, seems to have
two key ingredients: 1) a buildup of something that might be called an emotional
charge, whic