well rope
Or to damage its bucket
Is disappointing
The undercurrents and aquifers date to the ancient times. We became who we are
when we learned how to access and share them, to reach down deep, into the nature
of the one life we live. The commons are things which we’ve  gathered around. They
do not come to us. The well, like the bucket, the root or the book, are such enduring
devices by virtue of their having only one moving part: a living creature who does all
of the work, to draw upon their resources and to keep the sources in working repair.
What we are able to draw out and take away from these centers is a function of our
reach and our grasp, our understandings and comprehensions, our buckets and our
ropes, our memories and our new questions. The sources stay available, but the well,
not unlike an oracle, is a really lazy device: it will not force its waters, it will not roam
around spewing out wisdom. When time has taken a toll, someone with appendages
will need to repair it. But it will not make any effort at showing its gratitude. Its user
must take up the task and go for the water, not for the forms. The town may change,
but the well does not go roving about. Our humanity abides, regardless of cultures.
341

48.M, Key Words
Source, plenum, spring, cistern, fountain, tap, pools; center, hub, nucleus, nexus
Meeting place, commons; common ground, sources and pools; interdependence
Basic service & maintenance; utility taken for granted, maintaining links to source
Basic needs, truths, constants; replenishment, providence; be accessible, available
Resourcefulness, resources at your disposal, getting to plenty; there to draw upon
Developing character around deeper core; self-sufficiency, -reliance, -cultivation
48.G, From the Glossary
jing3 (a, the) well, source, wellspring, nucleus, mine, center of social activity,
constant; (a, the) well’s; a system of 8 private fields around a center or commons
48.T, Tuan Zhuan
To penetrate beneath the water and so bring up the water
(Is) the well
The well provides, and yet will not be exhausted
Rearranging the town does not change the well:
Since this (is) using a constancy within
To nearly reach, but then to fall short (with) the well rope
(Is) to fall short of bringing up results
To damage its bucket:
This indeed leads to disappointment
342

48.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.1: waiting on the outskirts, using what endures)
The well’s mud is not consumed
An ancient well with nothing to take
48.1x The well’s mud is not consumed:
(It is) at bottom
* An ancient well with nothing to take:
In time, forsaken
This drought is not helping this old well’s reputation. The things that one finds in
the well when it’s this far down are better left unthought of. Between centuries and
decades of slowly silting up, and passing cultures drawing the aquifer down, time
is taking its toll on this venerable, old source, although it still endures deeper cycles
than monthly rain and shine. Of course it will stay in its place, and not go to where it
looks best. Time may not care what happens to the well, but it cannot be blamed for
abuse. When the birds and frogs go elsewhere for water, it might be time to re-dig.
Lots of questions might be asked here, about what might have gone wrong, but the
answers all point one direction: there is no better time than a drought to make repairs
on a well, to muck it out and dig it deeper. Time doesn’t care, but in time, we must.
48.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.2: minister set back, interrupted, not one's cause)
The well is down low: shoot at the fish
The bucket is damaged and leaking
48.2x The well (is) down low: shoot at the fish:
Nothing to offer
It’s a low-down and dirty shame, that’s what it is, degenerate and pitiful. Something
so central as the source of refreshment is dying of pure neglect. This is not a fault of
the time, although time bore helpless witness as apathy grew and distractions up on
the surface of things took over w