th, he will know
to look for old problems, with deeper roots and causes long in need of correction.
21.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.4: tiger's search, staring, glaring, passion to hunt)
Biting on dry, bony meat
Securing funding and arrows
Warranting difficult persistence
Promising
21.4x Rewarding difficult persistence (with) promise:
Still an unknown
Getting ready to execute justice, the enforcer takes nourishment seriously. Already
well-fed for the showdown, he trains his bite for the worst, gnashing and grinding
and crushing, he even chews up the bone. Friends are a little nervous, but are glad
to be on his side of the problem, and show support by pledging their money and
arrows. The fierceness and the extent of this trouble are not yet perfectly known.
The tiger takes his turf seriously and rarely has cogency troubles, or doubts about
his ability to get to the throat of a problem. His bite is well-known and no laughing
matter. Events could grow brutal as hell soon, but by tomorrow’s light things might
not be as grim as expected. He might even frighten the problems away. But even
one such as this could save some trouble by laying out traps and contingency plans.
182

21.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.5: afflictions, do not medicate to bring well-being)
Biting into dried meat
Finding yellow metal
Persistence is trouble
Avoid mistakes
21.5x Persistence (is) trouble, avoid mistakes:
Find the proper response
While everyone here at the table might know that finding an arrowhead in your meat
is good luck, it is not half as well known that not finding this item until it’s too late
is something less than lucky. You’ll still play a part in your luck here. Sufficiency to
the task is the perfect quantum of vigor. Not enough b ite will not get the job done.
If the strength of the bite is tempered and only just barely sufficient, then a treasure
awaits your discovery. But if the jaws are too strong to play the more sensitive parts,
you will use up your treasure in having your teeth rebuilt. There is much less good
fortune in not being ready for the more unlikely events. So when you execute justice
and someone says to really crack down, think twice. Half a bite might be the best
portion. There are mitigating circumstances and things which might be redeemed.
21.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.6: shock and confusion, learn from neighborhood)
Wearing the cangue, hiding the ears
Unfortunate
21.6x Wearing the cangue, hiding the ears:
Quick to hear, (but) without clarity
Now he stands before you, unable to scratch his ears, a monument to his ignorance.
Hey, here’s an omen. Having demonstrated his deafness to words of fair warning
he may now be certified numb in the skull. It is not unusually cruel to punish this
stupid, inferior head. That’s where the trouble is, in the thinking that got him here.
Perhaps even now he finds ways to blame his parents and village. Maybe he will try
to explain how he just went out of his mind. No criminal acts against other people
are sane. This describes crime: it is not an excuse to commit one. And the one who
sets him free before he learns to own his misdeeds is now an accomplice and partner
in crime, as bad as the one who makes the bad laws. One more offense and someone
will cut off his ears: a visual aid to the code. It may still be that he can do nothing.
183

21, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 48, Jing, The Well
qian gua (inverse): 22, Bi, Adornment
jiao gua (reverse): 55, Feng, Abundance
hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
21, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Geburah in Atziluth
* Tarot: Five of Wands
* Astrology: Mars in Fire
21, Quotations
* Alexander finding himself unable to untie the Gordian knot, the ends of which
were secretly twisted round and folded up within it, cut it asunder with his sword.
 —Plutarch, Alexander
* Arrakis teaches the attitude of the knife - chopping off what’s incomplete and