more for a living earth!
Yet there are times to be only potential, to learn the things that you have in the bag,
to learn and not push the envelope’s limits, to just be no big thing, to be set aside,
out of the way, to not to be seen by adventure or have no need to prove freedoms.
The troubles will soon be compelling enough that this is a thing to not worry about.
To incubate, gestate, claim time or space for one’s own, also serves a great work.
67

02.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 08: Bi, Belonging
Fan Yao 08.5: exemplary, three sided hunt, without coercion
Golden dress
Most promising
02.5x Golden dress (is) most promising:
Refinement dwells within
The sovereign’s favorite robe is made from dull and bland yellow linen, is simple,
comfortably cut, without all the trappings, tassels and frills. Simplicity too can attract
and hold things together. Beauty is also a way of seeing, and not just some thing to
be seen. The wiser sovereigns remember things others forget: nobility is an ethic to
practice, not just a position to hold. Respect can be given and not merely sought.
Dignity is held in example, diplomacy in an open hand. A king can know that he is a
servant, in place by the grace of the ancestors and for the sake of those yet to come.
A full head of hair can serve for a crown, a rump as a comfortable throne, borne
around the kingdom by two loyal feet. Court can be held in the heart. Respect can be
had in better ways, so that helpers can walk upright. To be humble is not to be less.
02.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 23: Bo, Decomposing
(Fan Yao 23.6: the ripest fruit not eaten, nobility gains ground)
Dragons at war in the wild
They bleed indigo and golden
02.6x Dragons at war in the wild:
Their way (is) exhausted
Accepting can accept some wild ideas. Humanity thought up some notion that reality
comes in two halves, becoming, in the process, earth’s one exception to wholeness.
Softness is hardened and strength is made weak. And now both sides are bleeding.
The dualist picks and goads his champion, wages the war in his mind, with wild and
poetic visions of eternal battles between darkness and light, so ready to hand himself
over as some sort of coveted prize. In wholeness the forces also compete, moving
the beings ahead, and all the sides win - including the ones passing out of existence.
But taking sides you can’t have it all. Partial itself means less and unwholesome.
This is not a power struggle: power does not struggle. It is force exhausting itself.
This would be sad enough if it didn’t spill out of the mind and mess up the world.68

02.7, Using 6
Worth enduring persistence
02.7x Using six (with) enduring persistence:
For the sake of greater conclusions
Humans beings are in such a hurry they call themselves a race. Thinking they have
but a short way to go, they set an appropriate pace. Leaving no time to watch the
grass grow, they act as though they were parasites, rushing to grow and consume all
they can. They would flee to the stars in their ships and their prayers, and leave
what they pray to behind them, on the home where it began. Earth can be thought
to have a perspective on this. It might be the whole point of life: this would be of the
long run and passing the torch along to successors. Naturalness, what is so of itself,
that dumb to the sixth power wisdom that all life is heir to, knows a pace that might
go the distance: it is life that lives inside of its means, and knows to sustain its place,
and finds its goals in the journey itself. Persistence that fails to endure is just failure.
02, Notes
* 02.0 To the Northeast and Southwest were the relative centers or capitals of the
Shang (Yin) and Zhou dynasties respectively, at the time the mandate changed
hands. Southwest was friendlier ground, a more “secure and certain good for-
tune,” or a path of least resistance. The northeast was within the new domain and
was therefore a permissible direction, but here it is seen as more challenging than
is currently necessary.
* 02.0 This line may also