ed with substantial gifts. However, the medicine men do
not provide the curative potions for their clients, but decide what the ingredients
should be and then write them down in an ancient and secret language. This
545

writing is understood only by the m edicine men and by the herbalists who, for
another gift, provide the required charm.
The charm is not disposed of after it has served its purpose, but is placed in
the charm-box of the household shrine. As these magical materials are specific for
certain ills, and the real or imagined maladies of the people are many, the charm-
box is usually full to overflowing. The magical packets are so numerous that
people forget what their purposes were and fear to use them again. W hile the
natives are very vague on this point, we can only assume that the idea in
retaining all the old magical materials is that their presence in the charm-box,
before which the body rituals are conducted, will in some way protect the
worshipper.
Beneath the charm-box is a small font. Each day every mem ber of the
family, in succession, enters the shrine room, bows his head before the charm-box,
mingles different sorts of holy water in the font, and proceeds with a brief rite of
ablution. The holy waters are secured from the Water Temple of the community,
where the priests conduct elaborate ceremonies to make the liquid ritually pure.
In the hierarchy of magical practitioners, and below the m edicine men in
prestige, are specialists whose designation is best translated “holy mouth men.”
The Nacerima have an almost pathological horror of and fascination with the
mouth, the condition of which is believed to have supernatural influence on all
social relationships. Were it not for the rituals of the mouth, they believe that their
teeth would fall out, their gums bleed, their jaws shrink, their friends desert them,
and their lovers reject them. They also believe that a strong relationship exists
between oral and moral characteristics. For example, there is a ritual ablution of
the mouth for children which is supposed to improve their moral fiber.
The daily body ritual performed by everyone includes a mouth-rite.
Despite the fact that these people are so punctilious about care of the mouth, this
rite involves a practice which strikes the uninitiated 
stranger as revolting. It was
reported to me that the ritual consists of inserting a small bundle of hog hairs into
the mouth, along with certain magical powders, and then moving the bundle in a
highly formalized series of gestures.
In addition to the private m outh-rite, the people seek out a holy-mouth-
man once or twice a year. These practitioners have an impressive set of
paraphernalia, consisting of a variety of augurs, awls, probes and prods. The use
of these objects in the exorcism of the evils of the mouth involves al most
unbelievable ritual torture of the client. The holy-mouth-man opens the client’s
mouth and, using the above-mentioned tools, enlarges any holes which decay
might have created in the teeth. Magical materials are put into these holes. If there
are no naturally occurring holes in the teeth, large sections of one or more teeth
are gouged out so that the supernatural substance can be applied. In the client’s
view, the purpose of these ministrations is to arrest decay and to draw friends.
The extremely sacred and traditional character of the rite is evident in the fact that
the natives return to the holy-mouth-men year after year, despite the fact that
their teeth continue to decay.
546

It is hoped that, when a thorough study of the Nacerima is made, there will
be careful inquiry into the personality structure of these people. One has but to
watch the gleam in the eye of the holy-mouth-men, as he jabs an awl into an
exposed nerve, to suspect that a certain amount of sadism is involved. If this can
be established, a very interesting pattern emerges, for most of the population
shows definite masochistic tendencies. It was to these that Professor