ure is not about playing the leader
Playing, adopting and following leaders are games played first by young children,
and by the time they are grown, they play them so badly they injure themselves.
Because it is their way, it must be the way the universe runs. The mightiest force
in existence must be just like human kings. The small and feeble, too-human mind
has things all backwards again. The story is not about them, or who created what,
or who put all of the galaxies there, to light our way so poorly at night. One who
spends time above has seen bigger pictures than this. In the grand scheme of things,
and only a short time from now, humankind will be gone, whether to bones and dust
or into better descendants. Breaking open the mind, who wants to live for what lasts
will look beyond what the short sight will see. Creation is that which survives us.
01, Notes
* 01.2: Da ren is usually translated “the great man,” and this is an appropriate
translation in the context of Confucianism. But ren is gender neutral: and fu is the
word used for “gentleman,” when not used as a pronoun. Also the English word
“great” is too broad, admitting those who have not earned or deserved their wealth
and power. The Zhou Yi authors may have had Zhou Gong in mind when using
this term.
* 01.3: Jun Zi is usually translated “the superior man,” which also carries many
anachronistic Confucian implications. A key to the older idea here is the great
amount of humble and humbling work to be done on 
one’s merit, and value or
worth as a living being, thus the affectionate diminutive zi, indicating room to
grow. To the extent that the Yi may be considered a training manual for young
leaders, the authors may have had the young Cheng Wang, Zhou Gong’s nephew,
in mind.
* 01.4: From King Lear, Act 4, Scene 1, Gloucester
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined deep:
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me: from that place
I shall no leading need.
62

01, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 02, Kun, Accepting
qian gua (inverse): 01, Qian, Creating
jiao gua (reverse): 01. Qian, Creating (chong gua 7)
hu gua (nuclear): 01, Qian, Creating
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 28, 44, 43, 01
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 4th Moon (May)
01, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chokmah in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Two of Swords
* Astrology: Uranus in Air
01, Quotations
* A man must be Solomon before his magic ring will work. —Hafiz
* Character is destiny. —Novalis
* Because Allah has no other hands than yours. —Sufi proverb
* Much can be done to change the nature of man himself. —Julian Huxley
* But man, proud man, dressed in a little brief authority,
   Most ignorant of what he is most assured,
   His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
   Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
   As to make the angels weep. —Shakespeare, Measure for Measure
* Eritis sicut Deus, scientes bonum et malum. —Gen.3:5
* An epoch will come when people disclaim kinship with us as we disclaim
kinship with monkeys. —Kahlil Gibran
* The secret to creativity is knowing how to hide your sources. —Albert Einstein
63

GUA 02, KUN1, ACCEPTING
 
  Binary 000 000 = 00 & 64; Kun below, Kun above; Chong Gua
02.X, Overall Image
The earth’s capacity is acceptance
The noble young one, with tolerance of character,
Upholds the outer world
Earth is here and there, and now and then, vast and timeless. Heaven might be larger,
but earth is alive; subject to every least thing, but the root and birth of all sentience.
Why is a passiveness power? An event needs room to occur. Emptiness is capacity,
and capacity is power. The way power can go is the way power does go, that is its
way and its capacity. Begin with what is given and everything fit enough follows.
All the parts of the whole are in play. Any denial of things as they are is bad science,
not a basis for change. To have it all is accepting it all, at the least as a plac