soon,
and later, resentment. But often the pain will be in perfect proportion to what  is not
asked with modesty. If all that you ask is to not lose the core of yourself, this much
is easy to watch. Then, if or when a bond fails to form, you can always move away.
103

08.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
Fan Yao 39.3: if going is impassable, coming is turning around
Joining with such inferior people
08.3x Joining with such inferior people:
Is this not sufficiently painful?
Belonging is done without effort, like going the watercourse way, and yet the need
to belong is a powerful force: just look at any great river, roaring towards the sea.
The needs for this are a basic part of the being. Bonds of common blood, or even  of
simple circumstance, like being born in one kingdom inst ead of another, will wrap
much of human existence up in one package. Then we want anything but the silence
or vacuum , anything but the lonely and dark. But must the need to belong outweigh
almost everything else? Does unconditional love mean having no standard at all?
Does a fear to pass judgment mean life is an exercise in bad judgment? If equality
is assumed, is this being equal to everything average and mean? Inferior peers apply
pressure. Passive members can join the wrong flow, right down sewers and drains.
08.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.4: a lot of promise, avoid mistakes)
Outwardly joining with them
Commitment is promising
08.4x Outwardly belonging among the worthy:
In order to follow the superior
He joins the outer order, learns the secret handshake and passwords, and dons the
costume of custom. He is offered the mysteries one at a time. The king’s servant
pledges allegiance in words that are not his own, the priest leads a prayer that might
not ring true to his doubts. Or a family might be adopted, not blood. The externals
are not called trappings for nothing, but sometimes one really wants to be trapped,
to be known,  to be fooled into feeling secure and spend some time in safe harbor.
This might not be an inferior thing, and it’s not the same as falseness. Forms do not
matter as long as they serve. Any group that has boundaries will be a little parochial,
with an us that wants to look down on a them. Just don’t renounce the group next
door. Keep friends across the great water, and only accept what doctrine you need.
104

08.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.5: golden dress, most promising)
Belonging exemplified:
The sovereign employs only three game flushers
Letting go of the forward game
His district’s inhabitants will not be coerced
Promising
08.5x Belonging exemplified holds promise:
The position (is) correct (and) central
* To abandon the unwilling (and) seek the accepting
(Is) letting go of the forward game
* (His) district’s inhabitants will not be coerced:
The superior commands the middle
The game is surrounded on only three sides. This grants any beast its birthright to
freedom who chances to find the way out. Then one hunts the volunteers, the unfit
and the unluckier ones. The sovereign has set a noble example here, showing how
to rule without fraud, and the only force or compulsion being a force of compelling
example. He makes his people aware that they too are free to choose the way out,
if only across the great stream. A tyrant might believe that he holds a people with
fences and chains, collecting power with coercion, and conscripting a loyal army.
Of course it’s an ancient question: Pat on the back or a ruling fist? Carrot or stick?
Vinegar or honey? Attraction or promotion? So what kind of heaven do you go to
under a threat? Grip with the open hand and bind them with ties of their choosing.
08.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.6: observing others’ lives, a noble does no harm)
Joining with them without leadership
Unfortunate
08.6x Joining with them with no priorities:
Without a purpose (or) outcome
What sort of odd contradiction is this? Belonging and union work best