en oars!  For this did I once see, and did not tire
of weeping in beholding it. —Nietzsche, TSZ *56-3
* Valuing is creating: hear it ye creating ones!  Valuation itself is the treasure and
jewel of the valued things. —ib., #15
* Your true value depends entirely on what you are compared with. —Bob Wells
* The chief value of money lies in the fact that one lives in a world in which it is
overestimated. —H. L. Mencken
* The price is what you pay; the value is what you receive. —Unknown
142

GUA 15, QIAN1, AUTHENTICITY
 
  Binary 001 000 = 08; Gen below, Kun above
15.X, Overall Image
Within the earth is a mountain
Authenticity
The noble young one, accordingly,
diminishes the excessive and adds to the deficient
Appraising things with fair allocation*
The mountain stands in its past and future tense. Beyond its youth and its old age,
in both directions, is earth. The level horizon hides the distant peak, while another
peak stands just under the surface. Seen from time’s great perspective, the greatest
of things has its end. To find that end does not diminish a thing. To admit our own
ends and limits does not diminish ourselves. This speaks of an equity, and not of an
equality, not of making high things low or low things high, but adding some missing
perspective and finding things as they are, from various points of view. We may see
an excess and take some away, we may see a need and fill it, but this is just fairness.
15.0, Authenticity*
Fulfillment
The noble young one gets results
Earth exalted above the mountain? It just is, like an everyday suchness. Why do we
wax so hyperbolic and try to turn things into poems? We do not need to level things
either: high is high, except from above; we are small, except to the bugs. Modesty
is simply insistence that growth be honest and sure, and to be rid of what interferes.
Things are brought to completion and closure. It is too hard to keep things in all of
their proper contexts if we do not know where things end and their contexts begin.
To be genuine, fair, authentic or modest might mean declining a particular honor,
or dismissing a point of pride, but real, rock-solid modesty is not about how one
declines or accepts an honor, or refuses to allow a little pride. It’s all about giving
honor where due, and knowing where pride has its boundaries. We hear how the
world is perfect just as it is. Why must we be so extreme? Why do we even presume
to speak of perfection? The world is what it is. Cash those dreams in for cash value
and what you have left is much more stupendous than perfect. It moves along fine as
it is with accidents, defects and all. We seem to want to deceive ourselves forward.
143

15.M, Key Words
Due regard, respectfulness, to honor others according their merit; ordinary reality
Genuine, unpretentious, unassuming, modest, accurate, realistic, honest, authentic
Consistent, inexcessive; basis in fact, surety, solidity, firm ness, stability, sobriety
Curtailing the superfluous, parsimony; thoroughness, realism; rocks in the rough
On solid foundations; exacting appreciation, accurate assessment, groundedness
Simplicity, nothing extra or extraneous, restraint, limiting to the most stable form
15.G, From the Glossary
qian1 (a, the) authenticity, respectfulness, respect, modesty; (to be
) unassuming,
authentic, respectful, yielding, deferent, reverent, humble, modest; deficient
15.T, Tuan Zhuan
Authenticity (means) fulfillment
The heavenly principle completes the lowly
With honor and clarity
The earthly principle (is) humble,
(Even) while moving upwards
The heavenly principle diminishes the superfluous
And adds to the modest
The earthly principle transforms the superfluous
And replenishes the modest
Ghosts (and) spirits (both) haunt the superfluous
And enrich the modest
The human principle resents the superfluous
And applauds the modest
Authenticity ennobles and exemplifies
(Being) lowly and yet not easy to exceed
The noble young one has results
144

15.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, B