its. Strength is in evidence, explicit, lucid and ordered.
The mandate is only a thousand words long now, new l aws and guidelines are still
crisp and clear: lawyers have not got to them yet, so they serve no hidden agendas.
Changes are made by their author, and so they are made with authority. Our highest
standards and clearest guiding principles are not pushed to the forefront of change
by the masses. A cogent, commanding presence, even a hero, must carry them there.
49.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.6: fellowship with others on frontier, no regrets)
A noble young one’s leopard transformation
Ordinary people merely change masks
To expedite has pitfalls
To abide in persistence is promising
49.6x The noble young one’s leopard transformation:
This one’s style (is rich in) subtlety
* Ordinary people (merely) change masks:
Submitting in order to follow a noble
The leopard molts slowly and softly, his spots changing nuance by nuance, with a
delicate sort of grace. But under this beauty is substance, not glamour: his changes
go all the way through. Behind the soft smile are those sharp and dangerous teeth.
This is beauty which speaks of a long l ine of big cats who did well enough in the
toughest of times. This cat can just purr through these changes. Nobility shows to
those who have need to see it and lesser beasts are content to just molt in the face,
or approach wearing masks, averting their eyes, and trying not to make startled or
jumpy movements. His inferiors will maneuver for whatever  privilege and position
remains, changing in loyalties and allegiances, according to where they would settle.
The alphas of the group are still subject to change, only they’ll make better subjects.
351

49, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 04, Meng, Inexperience
qian gua (inverse): 50, Ding, The Cauldron
jiao gua (reverse): 38, Kui, Estrangement
hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
49, Notes
* 49.3x In other words, why not wait at the destination instead of going in circles?
49, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Hheth; Path between Yesod and Tipareth (Trad: Gb-Bn)
* Tarot: The Chariot (Summer solstice)
* Astrology: Fourth House, Cardinal Fire, Cancer
49, Quotations
* Time and I, against any two. —Spanish proverb
* Almost in the cradle are we apportioned with heavy words and worths: “good
and evil” - so calleth itself this dowry. For the sake of it we are forgiven for living
... . And we  we bear loyally what is apportioned unto us, on hard shoulders, over
rugged mountains. And when we sweat, then do people say to us: “Yea, life is
hard to bear!” But man himself only is hard to bear. The reason thereof is that he
carrieth too many extraneous things on his shoulders. Like the camel kneeleth he
down, and letteth himself be well-laden ... . Then seemeth life to him a desert.
—Nietzsche, TSZ
* Those who make peaceful revolutions impossible will make violent revolutions
inevitable. —J. F. Kennedy
* Ah, but I was so much older then, I’m younger than that now. —Bob Dylan
* An invasion of armies can be resisted, but not an idea whose time has come.
—Victor Hugo
* Trying to determine what is going on in the world by reading newspapers is like
trying to tell the time by watching the second hand of a clock. —Ben Hecht
352

GUA 50, DING3, THE CAULDRON
 
  Binary 011 101 = 29; Xun below, Li above
50.X, Overall Image
Over the wood is a flame
The cauldron
The noble young one applies principles of positioning
to manifest higher purpose
As wood and wind feed the flame from below, the dumb log turns itself back into
sunshine. Tending the flame is the alchemist, who has set things up to put heat and
light to higher new uses. Positioned above the flame sits the cauldron. By formula
and recipe, the raw stuff comes together, to converge in expected results, the higher
purpose and principles to which these changes are offered. The wise are attempting
to create a higher culture, by nourishing healt