to shore, fledgling struggling, criticized)
Boundaries maintain the family*
Regrets pass
37.1x Boundaries maintain the family:
The purposes have yet to evolve
At the beginning the home is in order, as the hearth is contained and the flame has
its place to not go beyond. The signals are shared and made clear. Few questions
remain about who makes what rules. This might seem to ignore several sources of
warmth, to lack in affection, or to curb spontaneous feeling. There are mistakes and
regrets. But this gives each household m ember a firm patch of ground to stand on
and much can be done on a patch of firm ground. Even an unlimited branch must
pick a direction to grow in. Rules are only a place to begin. The warmest of flames
still comes from cold and insensitive logs. Unless this order becomes an obsession
the home won’t be a prison. Half of a family’s troubles may come from boundary
disputes, trespasses across unknown borders and the missing safe place for retreat.
37.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.2: drawn to returning, promising)
Having no other goals to pursue
Remaining within, preparing meals
Persistence is promising
37.2x Six second has promise:
Accepting for the purpose of influence
We’ll assume we speak of the wife, but only to make the manly girls angry. Yes, the
little woman is tending to her chores. Ordinary life, well and fully attended, might
be one of the highlights of our existence, but this is not the point here. First things
come first, like good health and nourishment. Once the basic needs are met, we are
free to move on; until then we go in circles. She has chosen her chores. Her mate
has his aching back too. But there are more choices to make, like not wasting time
complaining of having no time, or not working twice as hard just to prove this point.
To simplify tasks is to cut the day’s work in half and set some time free. Husband
wrestles the world with two strong arms and a will. But the wife in her place has a
family of arms and wills. Serving is not servitude and the center is not confinement.
277

37.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 42: Yi, Increasing
(Fan Yao 42.3: increased by unfortunate events, be true)
Family members scolded severely
Regrettable harshness
Yet opportune
But wife and child smirking and mocking
Ends in disgrace
37.3x Family members scolded severely:
Not yet failure
* Wife (and) child smirking (and) mocking:
(Is) to lose the family’s boundaries
Someone forgot to take out the subconscious garbage. Even superior families will
have such inferior moments. Tempers flare up in all but the quietest homes. These
unfortunate little explosions at least open up hidden issues. Fires will get too hot.
The smallest friction, the least petty thing within reach is summoned and marched
into battle. Claims and accusations are stoked with extra heat. The middle ground
gives way to always and never. Once this data is out in the open, it might be used
to correct things. Sternest severity might even be called for, aimed at the problem,
not in each other’s faces. This will not end in catharsis: the need for this is a myth.
Wounds heal. But when husband reacts to snickers and smirks by punching holes
in the doors, this is a different level of troubles: loss of respect is the fire gone out.
37.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.4: mounting battlements, not capable of attack)
Enriching the family
Full of promise
37.4x Enriching the family (is) full of promise:
Acceptance in (this) position
When the family prospers it begins to have its effects on the world. But standards
of living must reach certain key levels first. Affluence first will fulfill basic needs.
Generosity begins with getting enough to give. A well-fed and satisfied people can
work longer hours for others. Individuals faring well make up the family welfare.
Families faring well make up the general welfare. This does not begin with a king
and flow downwards. All that a leader needs do here is to stan