win support for an assertion, copious
footnotes and emphasis on the years of experience or the formal degrees held by
the individual making a specific claim. This combination will tend to build
momentum as more citable authors join the group. Im portantly, the dead ones
cannot unjoin, even out of embarrassment. But if the present trends continue,
modernism is going to invite postmodernism, and that in turn deconstructionism,
or new age relativism, and so on through all the -isms that the frivolous twits on
the cultural scene are so fond of. I want to avoid all of that. As Laozi put it (# 48):
“Do not long to dazzle and jingle like jade: clunk and clatter like rocks.”
Given this building up of momentum, the scholars are getting bolder in the
broader exercise of 
their methods. The Chinese scholars of the early twentieth
century, particularly Gao Heng, et al (see History: Tim eline), encouraged the
practice of treating the received text and its minor variations as suggested starting
points - the text itself was to be freely emended wherever it was found to be
inconsistent with modernist assumptions. The trend has been carried into western
scholarship in varying degrees, with Kunst and Shaughnessy being the most
cautious and reserved in this practice, and Rutt and (especially) Gotshalk being
the loosest. The latter two will not even hesitate to move portions of the texts
around to other lines, or even eliminate blocks of text. There does not seem to be
any connection between the frequency of the modernist emendations and the
traditional degree of difficulty in understanding the text. That is, they do not seem
to be using this rather extreme measure with any degree of parsimony to solve
problems of interpretation. It does not seem to be limited to the inability to find
meaning in the traditional glosses. It does not even seem to be used to get them
out of the trouble their other methods have led them into. They will simply take a
perfectly comprehensible expression, as it is traditionally interpreted, and turn it
into utter nonsense. Having to start with the received tradition of interpretation
has its problems. But the received text is another matter: I have attempted in all
cases to work with the received text and have only rarely felt hamstrung or
deprived. The few choices I have made are discussed at the end of the Matrix.
32

There also seems to be a growing tendency to discount the "little words" in
the Chinese text, the particles, conjunctions, possessives, pronomials, adverbials,
prepositions, tense markers, interrogatives, etc. I can sympathize with this insofar
as admitting that they are a really complicated headache. Just a glance at any of
the longer entries in the Glossary reveals these unglamorous little words to be
very complex in their application. Although the Zhouyi uses are a more limited set
than shown here, maybe a fourth of the glossary options were already in use.
These words have been a problem for translators from the very beginning of the
Yijing's journey to the west, but now, with context criticism further constraining
their dizzying array of applications, it can be shown by scholars that very few of
the particles have any uses or meaning at all. Therefore, they must instead have
been used like spacers, punctuation marks, metering and rhyming devices, or they
are intrusions from later versions of the text. Quite the contrary: what they are is
enormously valuable grammatical clues to the meaning of the text, without which
you get a tossed word salad. If you ignore the particles you ignore half of what
precious little grammar the ancient Chinese had, and lose half of the meaning in
the process. Finding the proper application of these little words takes a great deal
of patient jiggling and pondering, but I at least hope that this attempt at a literal
word by word translation shows the effort to be worthwhile.
A non sequitur  (not in sequence or does not follow) is an argument where
the conclusion is drawn f