st close to what are now called the Sovereign
Gua was among the original Zhou Yi  dimensions. See the Gua assignments to the
Twelve Moons (Dimensions, Shi Er Di Zhi).
19, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Netzach in Assiah
* Tarot: Seven of Pentacles
* Astrology: Venus in Earth
19, Quotations
* Try not. Do or do not. There is no try. —Master Yoda
* Carpe diem. (Seize the day) —Horace
* Opportunities multiply as they are seized. —Sunzi
* We cannot put off living until we are ready. The most salient characteristic of
life is its coerciveness; it is always urgent. —Ortega y Gasset
* ... you must live in the world today as you wish everyone to live in the world to
come. That can be your contribution. Otherwise, the world you want will never be
formed. —Alice Walker, The Temple of My Familiar
* The time will come when Winter will ask us ‘“What were you doing all
Summer?” —Bohemian proverb
* Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed people can change the
world. Indeed it is the only thing that ever has. —Margaret Mead
* You cannot build a reputation on what you are going to do. —Henry Ford
* Whatever you do will be insignificant, but it is very important that you do it.
—Gandhi
172

GUA 20, GUAN1, PERSPECTIVE
 
 Binary 000 011 = 03; Kun below, Xun above
20.X, Overall Image
The wind moves over the earth
Perspective
The early sovereigns, accordingly, examined the regions
And comprehended their societies
To establish their doctrines
The wide-ranging wind blows over the earth, entering every valley and cave, every
niche and crack, by adapting to fit its place. The right idea embraces the real, simply,
but richly in detail. The founders set aside preconceptions, in order to learn before
teaching, observing the local ways and activities from inside out first, getting insight
before claiming overview, being sure to sow the right seeds for the soil. The doctrine
would vary, adapting to meet the needs of each point of view and the culture. Towers
to some are observatories; farther away they are landmarks. The proper view of the
tower encompasses both, but at any one given time only one might be usefully true.
20.0, Perspective
A cleansing but not a sacrifice
Being true is as good as majestic
Full of hope and trust, the people look up to the tower, watching the one up high on
the altar. Full of awe, the sage looks up at the stars, with the fires of heaven gathered
in waiting, beholding and being beheld, and being beholden, knowing what must be
the sacrifice. The master of ceremonies knows the perceptions and makes them the
carriage for delivering meanings, meeting the expectations, yet somehow still getting
the message across, giving them what they wanted to see, and yet telling them what  
had need to be told. Many degrees of comprehension are represented here and the
work is with many perspectives. But there is only gain here, not much to sacrifice,
except for the stuff that is washed from the eyes and the heart, and the junk that is
cleared from the view and the path. Many differing points of view can be added up
together. Some say that this is why there is life, and why we all stay so separate.
Others of course might say that there should be no why. We see more depth in the
world this way, more dimensions to our existence. There is a way to be true that
does not rely upon knowing only one truth. It is not lost in some relativity either.
173

20.M, Key Words
Observe, view, attend, study, contemplate, consider, examine; the examined life
Investigation, reconnaissance, review, survey, learning, comprehension, compass
(Changing) points of view, frames of mind, postulates, hypotheses, outlooks, ken
Frames of reference, reframing; universes of discourse; suspending a (dis-)belief
Overview, taking inventory, overall view, objectivity(-ification); reading the signs
Understanding other perspectives, a point of view of being beheld or objectified
20.G, From the Glossary
guan1 (to) attend, behold, comprehend, consider, contemplate, divine, evaluate