thinks he gives up too much for his people - but
really he might just be thinking too much. Maybe he could give up these thoughts
about sacrifice. The tepid baths could go too: maybe a deep tub with plenty of ice.
47.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.6: winner is stripped of honor three times by noon)
Oppressed by creepers and vines
Proceeding unsteadily and awkwardly
Uttering “movement is regret”
To own the regrets and go boldly forward is promising
47.6x Oppressed by creeping vines:
A less than proper response
* (If) movement (is) regret, have the regrets:
A promising move
Haunted and oppressed by mist and creeping vines, spooked and all tangled up in
the futility of it all, it seems he tried to live and learn, but may have learned it wrong.
Although one may be expected to regret actions past, it seems pretty silly to begin
by regretting the future. It is also expected that dreams and fantasies fail. But these
can fail and flop in the mind and end there and not make a mess in the world. That
is what much of the brain is made for. Ghosts belong in the past. When they come
at us from the future, something is turned around. Regret and remorse are supposed
to only look backwards. Anxiety gropes for ways to account for their presence, like
bad dreams make up monsters and demons. Paralysis will not get him out of this
trouble. When the sorcerer gets hold of such things he has them spy or run errands.
339

47, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 22, Bi, Adornment
qian gua (inverse): 48, Jing, The Well
jiao gua (reverse): 60, Jie, Boundaries
hu gua (nuclear): 37, Jia Ren, Family Members
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
47, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Qoph; Path between Yesod and Netzach (Trad: Mk-Nt)
* Tarot: The Moon (Low tide)
* Astrology: Twelfth House, Mutable Water, Pisces
47, Quotations
* Pain, indolence, sterility, endless ennui also have their lessons for you, if you are
great. —Emerson
* Sadness is almost never anything but a form of fatigue. —Andre Gide
* Much of your pain is self-chosen. It is the bitter potion by which the physician
within you heals your sick self. —Kahlil Gibran
* And spring brought me the idiot’s frightful laughter.
—Rimbaud, A Season in Hell
* And if there come unto them tender emotions, then do the poets always think
that nature herself is in love with them; And that she stealeth to their ear to whisper
secrets to it, and amorous flatteries; ... Some sensation of voluptuousness, some
sensation of tedium ... they all muddle up their water, that it may seem to be deep.
—Nietzsche, TSZ #39
* When we are tired, we are attacked by ideas we conquered long ago.
—Nietzsche
* Oh lonesome’s a bad place / To get crowded into. —Kenneth Patchen
340

GUA 48, JING3, THE WELL
 
  Binary 011 010 = 26; Xun below, Kan above
48.X, Overall Image
Above the wood there is water
The well
The noble young one, accordingly,
labors for the people to encourage cooperation
Depth by design, and resource by way of resourcefulness. We penetrate this water
in order to raise the water. The human clans gather and settle around these common
sources, and through the common effort the village becomes an oasis. The resources
that we share, the ways that we have adapted, the last few million years, the genetics
of cooperation, our humanity itself: these give us ways to reach into ourselves and
our fellows and draw out our best. But we also forget to use these things we share.
We take them for granted. We forget to maintain them. Wise ones draw the people
out, to demonstrate the uses of these resources, to refresh the shared understanding.
48.0, The Well
Rearranging the town does not change the well
Neither losing nor gaining,
Whether leaving or arriving, the well is the well
To nearly reach
But then to fall short with the well rope
Or to damage its bucket
Is disappointing
The undercurrents and aquifers date to the ancient times. We became who we are
when we learned how to access and share them, to reach down deep, into