i by reading one favorite translation but to pick at least
three and "add them together" to "broaden" the words. The "one word, one line" idea,
forming a two-dimensional tapestry of potential meanings, came later and seemed to allow
for an adequate breadth.
The information in this Matrix translation is organized into seven columns with the
alternative English words occupying the sixth. Following is a guide to the various kinds of
information given in each of the columns (refer to the beginning of the Matrix itself, to see
the columns numbered):
1) Far left. The bold numbers indicate a new heading, by Hexagram or Gua number,
followed by a section code:
    .M Gua Ming, the Hexagram Name or Title.
    .0 Gua Ci, the original or Zhouyi Hexagram Text.
    .# Yao Ci, the original or Zhouyi Changing Line Text, line number, top last.
    .T Tuan Zhuan, or the Commentary on the Judgment,  a later commentary on the Gua
Ci, comprising the Yijing’s First and Second Wings or Appendices.
    .X Da Xiang, or the Overall Image, a later commentary which looks at the Hexagram or
the Gua itself as a composite of two Ba Gua ,
 or Trigrams (aka Ban Xiang or half-images)
and then derives lessons for living. This is a part of the Yijing’s Third and Fourth Wings or
Appendices.
    .x Xiao Xiang, or the Little Images, a later commentary on the Yao Ci, comprising the
remainder of the Third and Fourth Wings.  Despite being included in the same Wing as the
Da Xiang, the authors are entirely different.
Within the area between headings are asterisks. These indicate a "parsing," or the
separation of the text into groups of words. These were not found in the original text but
were added later for clarity. They will sometimes act like periods, commas, colons, semi-
colons, or breaks in a line of poetry: there is no certain rule. With only one exception (at
02.0), I have followed fairly traditional parsing, usually as given in Z.D. Sung’s text. For
50

more information on variants see the Footnotes below. In the Tuan Zhuan and Xiao Xiang
sections, a "harder" parsing is given for paragraphs by the letter "P," and for sentences by
the letter "S". These will often take the place of the Chinese particle ye, which indicates the
completion of a thought. Ye is the only Chinese word which has been left out of the Matrix.
2) This column gives the Pinyin transliteration of the Chinese character. Many of the
characters have alternate pronunciations, according to their intended meanings, so two
different spellings here may refer to the same character. This happens at the Yi’s first word,
qian2, to create, which is also gan1, to dry. Be aware also that the same Pinyin word and
Chinese character can carry wildly different meanings. The word xu1 (2847), for example,
means "beard" at 22.2, "female bondservant" at 54.3 and "necessity" at 05.T. The Pinyin
system only recently replaced the Wade-Giles system as the standard for transcription. This
was the transition where Peking became Beijing  and Taoism became Daoism. For readers
unfamiliar with Pinyin, the two systems are compared at the end of the Glossary. The four
pronunciation tones sometimes represent choices between optional pronunciations. Here I
would generally follow Karlgren unless there was a significant preponderance of
disagreement shared by Mathews, Schuessler, Kunst, Ulving and Wieger.
3) This four-digit number is the character’s entry number in Harvard’s Mathew’s
Chinese English Dictionary , 1993, which is organized alphabetically but in the Wade-Giles
system. Only eleven of the words used in the Yijing, all of them in the Zhouyi, were left out
of this dictionary. I have assigned these eleven reference numbers in
 the 8000’s. Where the
four-digit number is omitted from this column the character is a quoted citation from the
section immediately preceding, in the Gua Ci or the Yao Ci . These are the words which are
italicized in Part One. Where the number is underlined this is the first occurrence of a
character