low and will not touch the inferior parts. As a
matter of having a course to our lives, we need to find and set limits, curtail and train
our natures to keep ourselves out of trouble. But to violate these natures, to be stiff
and rigid instead of just still, to pile on foreign and alien virtues and deny ourselves
a more natural course is merely another form of perversion. We have turned against
ourselves. This is as unwholesome as sin. A celibate gets himself bent out of shape
in the loins, pinches a nerve, cavorts with the succubus in the early hours of dawn,
and awakens to find his own clawmarks and blood on his breast. His own hands try
to set his heart free. Denial of life is bad management, deeply unkind to oneself, not
a path to wisdom. Resistance generates heat, resentment smolders in thwarted desire.
52.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
Fan Yao 56.4: wanderer in shelter, money and axe but no peace
Stilling one’s being
Not a mistake
52.4x Stilling one’s being:
Stilling all of the personal
He comes to terms with his limits and tries to stay calm about finitude. In stillness
he watches his impulses rising and falling, his thoughts as they come and go, his
feelings waxing and waning. At rest in the breath, in heart and mind, there is neither
self nor an other, except as little junctions where powers knot up for a while, where
original being pretends to be us. There are landmarks to locate, and touchstones to
touch here. It’s not like there’s nothing to do. Life forms form attitudes here at the
center, and these can turn the whole world upside down. Even scientists see what
they want to see: the still ones can watch what they want, and make better theories.
Our part in the process of living starts here at the place we begin. Of course, this is
not the end, meditation isn’t a goal. What we learn in stillness is where to go next.
368

52.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 53: Jian, Gradual Progress
(Fan Yao 53.5: geese to high ground, only three years, promising)
Stilling those jawbones
Words will have order
Regrets pass
52.5x Stilling those jawbones:
Applying the central principle
He practices ruling his speech now, and pays some overdue homage to listening and
silence. There are no limits to things which might be spoken about and thought of,
but this does not seem to discourage those who would fill up all silence. All of the
branches a tree could grow would certainly be its demise, so the tree needs to limit
itself to what makes fruit and seed. So too with proper speech: there is room around
one’s few, but meaningful words here for the verbal equivalent of breezes and light.
There is also some room to ponder one’s thoughts, and remove the unwanted sharp
edges. Once words get out they circulate many times over: the right words will keep
working their magic and the wrong ones will keep causing damage. Outspoken, but
not unthinking, is good, but the world around us wants idle gossip and small talk.
52.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 15: Qian, Authenticity
(Fan Yao 15.6: expressing modesty, deploying reserves at home)
Authentic stillness
Promising
52.6x Authentic stillness holds promise:
The way to a genuine outcome
He takes his humble silence and stillness to the highest place he can find. Up on top
of the mountain, he can order the clouds to go where they will, command the stars to
follow their courses. We have great authority up on the summit, as lords of our own
states of mind. The view is so great up here that less modest folks get embarrassed
approaching the foothills. The closer we can position ourselves to an axis, the less
unchosen motion we’ll need to endure. This need not mean being detached or aloof.
When we want our fullest command, this is where to begin, at the helm of our own
attitudes. We do not need to spend all our lives in self-examination, or introspect our
friends away, but when we would live in the actual world and know just what we are
capable of, we revisit this axis and learn. Wanting this world, as it is, makes it ours.
369