ple to fortify character
The wind is stopped and thrown back on itself. The root encounters a stone with
no cracks. This is going nowhere. The wind cannot be captured alive, except with
wings to keep it in motion. At the dam the water turns stagnant. Good food left in
the bowl will rot. Even our thoughts start to stink when their thinkers stop asking
questions. Some think that to fix things is to make them stay put. The young noble
lets in a breath of fresh air, while the sage arouses his people to aerate their spirits,
even when this calls for whimsy and pranks. Without innovation there is no creation,
without fresh air, no combustion. Many nouns abound here, just not enough verbs.
18.0, Detoxifying
Most fulfilling
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
Before the beginning, three days
After the beginning, three days
Which side of the bridge do we sit on to ponder? Do we look three days upstream,
to the melting snow and old rain? Or three days down, to the sea? The sage might
sit on this bridge in the present, but even his shortest time’s span might be seven
days wide. He keeps his moments inside of their contexts and thus keeps his world
on the run and alive. Breezes don’t come in a box. Things die and grow rotten when
pulled out of context. Then how do we fix this? How might we arrest this decay?  
Fix and arrest are the wrong things to do here. We have too much of containment,
enough of things safe from the changes. The liberal idea will become an institution
and soon it no longer responds to the needs it was made to serve. Its big job now is
defending itself against any change but its growth. The good idea becomes a belief,
soon threatened by other perspectives. The decaying civilization cannot permit the
experiments with styles of life which are poised to replace it. Habits and dogmas,
pathologies and neuroses, circle back on themselves like incestuous clans. The rot
spreads. But this has its good points as well: there is much which ought to decay.
161

18.M, Key Words
Fixations, toxic ideas, dogma, pathologies, bad medicine, ego, poison, venom, rot,
Degeneration, deterioration, decay, s uffocation, spoilage, corruption, resentment
Righting wrongs, antidotes, reparation, restoration, renewal, fresh air; clear the air
Revitalization, rejuvenation, redemption, stirring it up;  purging, cleansing, curing
Poor circulation, constipation, necrosis, atrophy, stuffiness, festering, decadence
Stirring up, remedial action, corrective measures, flushing out the system, reform
18.G, From the Glossary
gu3 (a, the) corruption, decay, decadence, rot, putrefaction, worms (in food or the
belly), toxicity, poison, pestilence; bad medicine, bad magic, slow poison, venom;
fixation (s), stagnation, deception, guile, delusion, insanity; (glossed in guwen as
chong M1519: worms, insects, reptiles); (a, the) renewal, healing, curing, purging,
detoxifying; [neurosis, toxic ideas, a closed mind] ; (to be) fixated, degenerating,
deteriorating, decaying. This is a janus word, meaning both to be poisoned and to
cure from poison.
18.T, Tuan Zhuan
Detoxifying
The firm (is) above while the flexible (is) below
Adaptive and yet motionless
Fixations
Detoxifying (is) most fulfilling:
As all under heaven (is) healed
Worthwhile to cross the great stream:
(In) moving on there is work to do
Before the beginning, three days,
After the beginning, three days:
In the end, in due order, there will be a beginning
As heaven behaves
162

18.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 26: Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
(Fan Yao 26.1: this will get harsh, worthwhile to quit)
Correcting father’s fixations
To be a young one examining
Is not a mistake
Difficult
But in the end, promising
18.1x Correcting father’s fixations:
Intending to inherit the examined
Along with the land and family’s fortune, the legacies and traditions, the father’s
fixations will follow the line. The young one enters the work as a son, questioning
what it means to inherit, and wondering just how far he might go saying no, thanks