and suspect a divine
intervention, or think that you have met with the ultimate truth, or at least found the
way to the top. You are born again now. Is it still too soon to ask where this new life
will go, or has this one already been planned by others? Ecstasy is such a fine place
to visit, with medicine or on foot. A sorcerer draws a circle and within this becomes
the deity. But when he steps back outside, he is merely enriched by experience. The
monk meets his maker at last, but forgets to ask the big questions. He can only flop
around on the floor and then faint. Sometimes it is even good science to suspend the
disbelief in a moment like this. It is still tragic when someone cannot make it back.
153

16, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 09, Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
qian gua (inverse): 15, Qian, Authenticity
jiao gua (reverse): 24, Fu, Returning
hu gua (nuclear): 39, Jian, Impasse
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
16, Notes
* 16.T Shang Di, “the highest divinity,” should not be translated “God,” as many
have done. Anthropomorphism was more common back in the Shang than in the
Zhou. There is not a divine personality, purpose or plan in this Zhou tradition,
only the sacred way that heaven and earth work together. There is certainly an
intelligibility about this, but not necessarily an intelligence. True reverence, won-
der and gratitude do not presuppose or require an object of worship, merely a true
opening up to the divine nature. This construction, which is a literal translation,
seemed to offer an expression useful also to the a-theistic or the non-theistic, and
allows for the magic of the universe without necessarily personalizing any of it and
dragging in conscious intent, divine plans and teleology.
16, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Kether in Atziluth
* Tarot: Ace of Wands
* Astrology: Saturn in Fire
16, Quotations
* A sorcerer asks the question “If we’re going to die with the totality of ourselves,
why not, then, live with that totality?” —Castaneda, Tales of Power
* Earnestness is the path of immortality, thoughtlessness is the path of death.
Those who are in earnest do not die. Those who are thoughtless are as if dead
already. —Buddha, The Dhammapada
* The measure of an enthusiasm must be taken between interesting events. It is
between bites that the lukewarm angler loses heart. —Edwin Way Teale
* The tragedy of man is what dies inside himself while he still lives.
—Albert Schweitzer
* Without any intentional, fancy way of adjusting yourself, to express yourself as
you are is the most important thing. —Shunryu Suzuki
* Action springs not from thought, but from a readiness for responsibility.
—Dietrich Bonhoffer
154

GUA 17, SUI2, FOLLOWING
 
  Binary 100 110 = 38; Zhen below, Dui above
17.X, Overall Image
Within the pool there is thunder
Following
The noble young one, accordingly, approaching nightfall,
Goes indoors for refreshment and relaxation
Movement under the surface.  Times have their rhythms,  their pulses and currents,
their tuggings and tides,  times to move forward,  times to pull back,  the drumming
that speaks of the world’s inclinations.  Move to this natural rhythm and joy leads
the  way.  A sage adapts gladly and follows his tastes:  when hungry, he eats, when
tired, he sleeps.  Which direction will he take as his own?  The one which finds the
right  place at just the right time.  He may pause to ask for directions and allow the
whole world to show him the way. Nothing is surrendered here. Following leaders
or following prey,  if he follows his own best interests, this will show him his way.
17.0, Following
Most fulfilling
Worthwhile to be dedicated
Not a mistake
We truly misunderstand what pursuit of happiness means: it is happiness that does
the pursuing and tells us when we are on the right track, while as prey it is nothing
but trouble. There are right and wrong ways to follow, but not the way most think.
Those who believe first and then follow have basic things confused. They follow