here is also a sense in which
"native climate" can refer to the broader realms of human experience, and I have
already made my prejudices known regarding this issue - that technology and
complex cultural advances aside, we still have a great deal in common with the
Early Zhou Chinese as human beings living in human societies with more than a
hundred millennia as a single species in common. And in conjunction with this, an
argument can be made that the Zhouyi authors were keeping their famously keen
cognitive abilities alert to the existence of human universals. Assuming that they
were looking for common problems, this is what they wanted to write about. With
this possibility, we should not be too quick to assume that any or all Zhouyi
humor would necessarily be lost to our cultural differences.
It has been my admittedly unreachable objective to 
discover the intended
meanings of the Zhouyi authors. I have made no apologies or excuses for this,
and I will openly disagree with anyone who claims that this should not even be
attempted simply because it is doomed to failure. As a working hypothesis, and
not a theory in need of a proof, the value of the idea can be judged by its
conclusions as well as by its premises. And one of these conclusions is that the
hypothesis might be able to solve several long-standing and otherwise intractable
problems of interpretation. An inability to even look for humor may have left a
number of lines completely misunderstood and thus badly translated for all these
many centuries. I am, of course, too close to the task to be the judge of this, and
so I submit the following for your edification and amusement.
Below are several examples of what I consider to be intended humor, but
somewhat buried by the Zhouyi authors in what I have termed "layers of vertical
ambiguity". It has gradually become my opinion that humorous devices such as
these, particularly irony, used to illustrate a situational ethics, and caricature or
parody, using images depicting people "unclear on the concept", may be
characteristic of as much as a tenth of the Zhouyi text. Irony and parody are the
two most common forms, but there are others, some specific to the nature of the
Zhouyi itself, which will be discussed as they come up. All this is in addition to
the use of a still more frequent "simple light-heartedness." Even if some of t hese
nominations fal
l to more serious scrutiny I hope that enough survive to at least
552

open a discussion on the topic, to which there seems to be a lot of resistance from
both believer and scholarly types. Two translations are given for each line, one of
the popular versions and my own. Admittedly mine puts a little spin on the line
translation to help to bring out the subtle ideas, but a look at the Matrix
translation and the Glossary will show that I have still not ventured very far at all
from a strictly literal translation.
01.4
* Leaping about on the brink of a chasm. He is not at fault. (Blofeld)
* Somehow to dance across the deep. With no mistakes.
This one is more of an example of simple lightheartedness than humor, and
it has a good reason for being so. It is generally assumed that the subject is still
the young dragon, finally ready to make that all-important rite of passage, the big
transition from aerodynamic theory to true flight, wherein the insubstantial wind
must be grabbed, used for support and climbed upon. (Wind is from the hui g ua
or upper Trigram in the zhi gua or resultant hexagram). Well, you may be a young
dragon, but standing there on the edge of that c liff for the first time, your mighty
knuckles are still really white. Just take hold of the wind - yeah, right. W hile the
very Gravity of the situation must be fully appreciated, it is also the thing that will
kill you. And so it is important to learn to "lighten up", giving up all but the most
necessary baggage. Lightening up could be just the key, just the thing to do
against gravity. I think the line is similar in imp