ries of interpretive fussing over
the diagrams. He used the school’s methodology of  ming li , or name principles,
also called zheng ming, or the rectification of nam es, in trying to move inward
towards the core of the Yi, from the words on the surface, through the symbols of
the middle layers, to the ideas at the center. Once the idea was gained, he claimed,
the symbols and words were no longer necessary. To do this well required a clear
understanding first of the word meanings and their etymologies, and then a clear
understanding o
f the meanings of the symbols. Semantics, and carefully defined
categories and concepts, were most important to this analysis. And so too was the
elucidation of specific philosophical and mor al points within a largely Confucian
framework. But since Wang Bi’s version of the classic was the Yijing, and not
simply the Zhouyi, there was already a lot of clutter and extraneous stuff which
he never thought to sweep out of the images. This was the first of his problems.
The second was that there were structural dim ensions in the Zhouyi which were
important to the generation of its terminology, dimensions which the Wings had
failed to point out, and dimensions which only the superficial words could point
to. So when Wang Bi thought he had the idea, and therefore could dispense with
the words and the symbols, he in fact missed the point and developed superficial
ideas of his own instead. In all fairness, however, remember that his life was cut
short and he had little time to mature as a philosopher.
The Yi Li Jia was to be the dominant force in Yixue until the Song dynasty.
And most of the modern interpretations of the Yijing are founded upon analyses
by its members. Two of the 
standard texts of today were written under this
influence: Kong Yingda’s Zhouyi zhengyi  and the Tang dynasty’s Li Dingzuo’s
Zhouyi jijie. Lu Deming (556-627) wrote the Zhouyi yinyi and the Jingdian
shiwen and included Han ( Xiang S hu) commentaries. The work of Li Dingzuo
also includes some Han Xiang Shu commentaries.
Confucianism was almost dormant through the seven centuries from the end
of the Han to the beginning of the Song. It began a slow comeback with Han Yu
(768-824), who thought it best that the growing influence of Buddhism, as it was
adapting to its new Chinese context, be resisted. Li Ao (d. 844) continued this
523

Confucian comeback, but he began to incorporate Buddhist ideas. The Xuanxue,
Yi Li or Neo-Daoist school still held the stage, but like a janitor does between
shows. Chen Tuan (907-960) began to bring (religious) Daoist ideas forward,
largely in the form of three diagrams (tu) and the oral teachings which went with
them. Two of these were number mandalas. The He Tu, or Yellow River Map, was
little more than a m agic square in a jing tian (well-field or tic-tac-toe) grid: all of
the numbers added to fifteen. The Luo Shu, or Writing from the River Luo, was
more complex, showing the numbers one through ten, as odd and even, permuted
through the Wu Xing  or Five Agents mandala. These two found their way to
Shao Yong (1011-1077), igniting his love for numbers in patterns. But this love of
numbers would take him into binary, rather than decimal, expressions of the two,
four, eight, and sixty-four of the Yijing. His primary pattern was called the order
of the Primal Heaven, Xian Tian , an expression which dates back at least to Chen
Tuan and his particular Daoist school. Shao Yong would develop this into an
unusually non-anthropocentric cosmology, and then append to this, th rough
number associations, a human ethic. His patterns are discussed and graphed in
Dimensions.
The third of the diagrams, called the Wujitu, or the Diagram of the Ultimate
No-thing-ness, was a map-ladder to the higher realms of existence in a pattern o
f
ten spheres (see Dimensions, Fig. 39). Wu, or No-thing, had been used by Daoists
since Laozi to describe the highest stateless state (i.e. ecstasy, derived from out-
of-stasis). The sphere