east hope that this attempt at a literal
word by word translation shows the effort to be worthwhile.
A non sequitur  (not in sequence or does not follow) is an argument where
the conclusion is drawn from premises which are not logically connected with it,
mistaking an inference for a logically sound conclusion. There may still be a
relationship, but not necessarily a clear, direct or causal connection. One of the
places this appears is in the use of context criticism t
o date texts according to
their style, grammar and vocabulary. It is fairly universally accepted that at least
the bulk of the Zhouyi was set down during the Early Zhou, roughly between
1027 and 771 BCE. I personally am of the opinion that creative work on the
oracle, from the collection of ancient sayings to the later editing, updating and
polishing, spanned a significant portion of this entire period. The development of
vocabulary and glosses during this era was very complex, not the kind of simple
thread to which we can apply the notion of sequence or sequitur: it is a woven
tapestry, not a thread. The time bending vocabulary runs in different directions.
Many ancient sayings and phrases may have been adopted unaltered from the
middle Shang and before. The king might at any time have decreed revisions,
additions or updates to the text, or his guild of diviners might have done so with
the king's consent. He may have also ordered many deletions. At the same time,
contemporary observations were being added, mantic vocabulary f rom earlier
times was mixed with old and new ideas and the authors may well have been
coining new words, stretching the envelopes of old ones and describing new
concepts. In addition, thou canst not forbid an author to pen in ye olden t ongues
or brainwork a new tomorrowland mindspeak. You cannot make the statement
that, in a work which may have been edited repeatedly over many centuries, the
occurrence of terminology belonging to a particular period or reign fixes the date
of the work’s composition in that particular period or reign. It does not follow.
33

Weak Social Science
The broader culture in which the Zhouyi was composed is foreign to ours
in space and more primitive than ours in time. Human culture, as we understand it
today, was in a relatively early stage, having had perhaps not much more than a
mere seventy-five thousand years to evolve. Both the genetic makeup and the
complexity of the neural structures of its anatomically modern human inhabitants
were virtually indistinguishable from ours. As has been shown repeatedly by our
encounters with paleolithic societies and stone age cultures, given the presence
of a translator and a little time, there is probably very little outside of the realm of
advanced science and technology which we could not readily understand about
each other. It seldom takes long to find much in common and it seldom takes long
to share a good laugh. Culture is much more indispensable to knowledge than it
is to wisdom.
Anthropologists and other social scientists, in their attempts to be serious,
scientific disciplines like physics, have often misguidedly sought pure objectivity
in their observations. Often in doing so they have merely denied or suppressed
their assumptions and prejudices instead of neutralizing them. These will then
fester in the darkness and color their observations in the oddest of ways. I have
included a fun spoof of this phenomenon in Appendix 1, Lessons for the Scholars,
entitled "Body Ritual Among the N acerima." It should be required reading for
anyone trying to reconstruct a picture of life in another culture from an outside
observer's point of view. Foreign languages should sound foreign, alien cultures
should look alien, and the mysterious things uttered by diviners should sound not
unlike the word salad uttered by schizophrenics.
After all of these years of doing social science, it seems that we still have
not learned to question the motives and assumptions that underpin our oh-s