lls at one’s fabric,
there should be little surprise to see movement elsewhere as well. When one sees
that things are about to get better, or that something good needs to be done, the kind
of movement seen in grass roots spreads the message and action around. Those of
like will, or even like would, will not be far behind. Even if one is alone and peculiar,
use the net of connections here: friends can help friends from oceans or eons away.
11.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.2: wounded in left leg, rely on horse’s strength)
Embrace the wilderness
It is useful to cross the river without a boat
Avoid aloofness and neglect
Alliances are impermanent
Learn the value in balanced action
11.2x Embrace the wilderness (and) learn the value
 in balanced action:
Thereby to honor the important
When you want to take a traveler’s money, make him afraid of the places he goes.
Then he will pull a great heavy shell around him and fill it with the familiar. Then
make your inn look just like his home. Such a one would miss much in any event.
But do not malign the one who goes native, who travels as light as he possibly can
and interacts with the world. One with big plans and long roads meets the time on
the terms of the time, meets the events with all that they have to offer. If no ferryman
shows at the crossing, he finds it no setback to swim. His empty gourd floats well.
Following yesterday’s footsteps is no way to cross a great distance, so he thinks up
new things to do on the way, things bright and fit to each situation. Friends come,
and then he will go, but this will not chill the meeting. He was never the stranger.
121

11.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.3: sweet commitment,  be concerned, avoid error)
There is no level without a slope,
No going without a return
It is difficult to persist with no errors
Do not worry: these are certainties
In nourishment find happiness
11.3x No going without a return:
Heaven (and) earth meet here
Heaven and earth rub together, creating the myriad beings. Rubbings, by definition,
go first one way, then the other. So what are these ups and downs but a chance to
dwell in small and nearsighted states? The chance to learn to buy low and sell high?
To bet on all of the horses? To have both sides as a goal? To take some charge of
our own satisfactions? Change refutes only the lesser existence. The sage goes to
heaven by filling his belly. With his gratitude secure, he then has his yes and his no.
When his pursuit is happiness, he simply goes to where it is stable, to what survives
the ups and the downs, to the changes. Wisdom looks ahead, sometimes impossibly
far. It can taste next autumn’s fruit in advance. But the durable satisfaction knows
no thing to be safe from destruction - and no future safe from not happening at all.
11.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.4: hedge opens, power of the cart in the axle mount)
Fluttering and fussing
Not much enrichment by way of these neighbors
Not guarding the way to truth
11.4x Fluttering (and) fussing, not much enrichment:
Completely neglecting the substance
* Not guarding the way to truth:
Within the heart (is) the hope
His silos are all filled up, but he twitters down to his neighbors to borrow a peck of
rice and some comfort. There he is met with affected surprise and delight, according
to the customs, pursuant to all the newest rules of behavior. Every gesture is studied,
an apt elaborate surface for every occasion. Is all of this motion and noise to fill up
the awkward stillness and silence? Or does the time spent in all of this meaningless
mess speak to deeper needs unfulfilled? Deep down they do want to trust and relate,
to find value deep in each other, to say what is on their minds and express what is in
their hearts, somewhere under those fears. They orbit around these needs, the silence
and stillness a great, gaping hole in each of their beings, with no idea that such an
empty place is a