liam James
250

GUA 33, DUN4, DISTANCING
 
  Binary 001 111 = 15
33.X (Gen below, Qian above)
Beneath the sky is a mountain
Distancing
The noble young one, accordingly,
is distant from the common people
Not with ill will, but with reserve
The mountain stands high against the horizon, but heaven is not diminished by this.
The human mind can open up to unthinkable distance and scale. From atop the peak,
or other places above, there is little that seems like an obstacle, though progress may
still mean changing directions. Given just a bit more perspective we can alter the size
of anything. Given the larger frames to refer to we can put things in smaller places.
Given broad choices in new points of view we can see things from different angles.
The wise might use all of these options, even to be aloof and not accessible, even to
avoid any issues they want to avoid, to reserve themselves for adventures of value.
33.0, Distancing
Success
Little reward in persistence
Backing away to get the big picture, or at least a broader perspective, even the great
mountain shrinks. When we have a big need to move ourselves forward we have a
small trick to play: we make our goals seem big and important. But sometimes we
forget we can do this backwards too, since backwards might not look like progress.
By adjusting the relative size of things we can find the perfect distance. We can go
to places where problems are manageably small, but not so reduced in importance
that solutions are overlooked. Success will go where success is best. If this means
being elsewhere, then staying here is not so good or smart. If we need to escape we
progress by moving backwards. This will go somewhat more quickly if first we can
turn around. This needs no repulsive force, we need not to be taken aback, we need
not first be unhappy in the place we wish to leave, nor do we need the aloofness. We
need to do nothing more than change our minds and start off in some new direction,
one recently renamed forward. Craving and aversion both harm. It is you, not things,
not going your way. Error will blunder forth, but persistence is not a virtue in error.
251

33.M, Key Words
To retreat, step back, detach; strategic pullback, withdrawal, neutrality, abstention
Issues of freedoms from and to; retire a debt; retirement, sabbatical, sabbath, rest
Seclusion, refuge, sanctuary, asylum, reserve, haven, safe distance, out of reach
Retraction, resignation, quitting claim; inaccessibility, discretion, disengagement
Escaping, transcending, reframing; taking a larger point of view, a bigger pi cture
Neutralizing, letting go, standing down, stepping back, getting away, evasiveness
33.G, From the Glossary
dun4 ( to) retreat, withdraw, retire, escape, evade, avoid, flee, hide away, withdraw
from, get distance from, step back (from), run away, abscond, skulk, hide; drag
the feet in walking (s, ed, ing); (a, the) retirement, retreat, reservation, sanctuary;
distance, distancing, withdrawal; [reframing]; (to be) hidd en, concealed, evasive,
withdrawn, invisible, secluded
33.T, Tuan Zhuan
Distancing succeeds:
Get distance and then succeed
The firm (is) suitably placed and resonant
To partake in the seasons’ progress
Little reward (in) persistence:
[The flexible] penetrates and then prevails
Distancing’s proper timing (is) very important here!
252

33.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 13: Tong Ren, Fellowship With Others
(Fan Yao 13.1: fellowship with others at the gate, not a mistake)
Withdrawing the tail in trouble
Not at all useful to have somewhere to go
33.1x Withdrawing the tail comes to have troubles:
(If) not in motion, where is the crisis?
Only moments ago he was leading this charge, but then he got himself too advanced  
before the new call for retreat. Now all of the timid are found at the vanguard, along
with the foresighted sage. Now he heads up the rear guard, trying to cover his tail,
leading the wrong crowd forward. This makes him as bait for unwanted attentions,
the loose ends that need tying up.