tural boundaries
Ethnocentrism, anthropocentrism & xenophobia; common purposes & causes
Mutual endorsement and admiration societies, like-minded people, consensus
Schools of thought, group-think, cultural diversity, relativity of mores & values
Belief systems, collective associations, mass follies; symposiums, convergences
13.G, From the Glossary
tong2 (to) agree, assemble, assimilate, affiliate, associate, belong, come together,
commune, partake in, conform to, congregate, converge, concur, gather, harmo-
nize, identify, join, make uniform, share, unite (s, ed, ing) (in, with, to); (to be)
alike, all, as one, colloquial, concordant, conforming, consensual, equal, identical,
identified, in the company of, like minded, one, one with, similar, the same, united,
together with, unanimous,; (a, the) community, assembly (ies), associates, asso-
ciation, colleagues (of), agreement, convergence, fellowship (with), meeting, joining,
gathering, harmony, identity, oneness, partners, sameness, unity, union; of the same
...; fellow...; simultaneously, concurrently; and, with, as well as
ren2 (a, the) person, people, man, woman, one(s), other(s), another, human being,
individual (s); each (one), other persons/people; anybody, anyone, everybody,
everyone, somebody, someone (else)(’s); some, th ose; humanity, humankind,
mankind, society; character, citizen, fellow, folk; inhabitant, member, occupant,
participant, persona, personality, population, personnel, staff, role; (in) adulthood;
(of) maturity; (to be) human, adult, grown, mature; humanity’s; (a, the) person’s,
people’s, occupant’s; fellow-; -body, -man, -person, -ist
13.T, Tuan Zhuan
Fellowship with others
The flexible finds a position, gains the center
and resonates with the creative
So this is called fellowship with others
Fellowship with others says that
Fellowship with others on the frontier (is) fulfillment
Worthwhile to cross the great stream
(Meaning) higher order endeavor
Refinement (and) clarity make use of strength
The central (lines) (are) correct (and) correspond
The noble young one (is) principled
Only the noble young one develops the capacity
To comprehend the direction of all under heaven
132

13.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 33: Dun, Distancing
(Fan Yao 33.1: withdrawing tail in trouble, not useful to go)
Fellowship with others at the gate
Not a mistake
13.1x Departing the gate (in) fellowship with others:
Given this, who is in error?
The fellowship meets at the gate, sharing rumors and stories, pestering the visitors
for news of a large world not very distant, getting big earfuls of wondrous reports,
of a world of difference out there. Common cause is so easy here, but they start to
poke their noses out into the larger world, not yet funneling out, not ranging far and
wide. They begin to speak about going beyond and plan their first adventure, from
the threshold of this gate to the first great shore, beginning to open to newer ideas.
Some men devour their enemies, some eat their fallen comrades, while another tribe
buries good meat in the dirt. This must be witnessed by someone! As a child leaves
crib, a youth leaves home, a man leaves province, the sage leaves nations to embrace
a whole earth and siblings across the great waters. But first is the first great shore.
13.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 01: Qian, Creating
(Fan Yao 01.2: see a dragon in the field, meet a mature one)
Fellowship with others only within the clan
Embarrassing
13.2x Fellowship with others (only) within the clan:
An embarrassing course
Communities of interests not shared are not wrong, nor is seeking ground not held
in common. Yes, others are different. And other races and cultures are different, even
under their skin. But no more different than one of your eyes from the other, giving
a disparity that allows a perception of depth. This fellowship admits only one clan.
They only seek similarities to their own superior persons. Thus even their gods look
like members. They will fashion and arm their devils from everything n