, there will be a full measure somewhere. And if
good spirits top these both off, half-measures can be seen in new ways. Something
wonderful happens when economy again means thrift. Whatever is left over, once
the needless has gone, is enriched, treasured, appreciated and more easily cared for.
After a long run of growth and prosperity this may be hard to relearn. We pare our
domains and ambitions back down and lower our expectations, using phrases like
leaner and meaner, less is more, or small is beautiful. But does wealth merely mean
having much of what is scarce? Why not enough of what is plentiful and the same
portion when it’s not? It has to be worth something to not suffer the ups and downs.
299

41.M, Key Words
Diminish; to reduce, economize, forego; contraction, concentration, conservation
Sacrificing, offering up; dues, service, subtraction, trying to lose only inessentials
Trimming excesses, plugging leaks, lowering expectations, doing more with less
To make the most, make do; distill, condense, concentrate as forms of enrichment
Enrich, make less dilute, keep the good stuff; building resilience; losing negatives
Extenuation, distraction, depreciation, demands on resources, use, wear and tear
41.G, From the Glossary
sun3 (to) bel ittle, chastise, cut (back), criticize, cut down to size, damage, harm,
injure, decrease, destroy, diminish, dwindle, economize, lessen, lose, reduce, trim,
spoil, subtract, weaken, wound (s, ed, ing); (a, the) concentration, contraction,
decrease, detriment, diminution, loss, reduction; (to be) concentrated, contracted,
decreased (by), diminished, lessened, reduced, taken from, weakened; detrimen-
tal, disadvantageous
41.T, Tuan Zhuan
Decreasing
Decreasing the subordinate to increase the superior
This process elevates conduct
Decreasing and still holding true
(Is) outstanding opportunity
Nothing (is) wrong
(But it) calls for persistence
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go
How is this applied?
A pair of (simple) rice baskets may be used for the offering:
Two (small) rice baskets will correspond with the time
Decreasing the firm to increase the flexible presumes timeliness
Decrease (and) increase (are) excess (and) want
Interacting in time (and) functioning together
300

41.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.1: discipline to remove fetters, not to continue)
One’s own affairs are rushed and passed by
No harm is done
But consider decreasing this
41.1x One’s own affairs (are) rushed (and) passed by:
Value a joining of purposes
The value of your services may be weighed in various ways. To suspend your own
activities and rush off with your offerings to hel p a friend in need is, of course, an
unselfish and generous thing to offer. But if your own activities had any true value
in their own right, however lesser or greater than what you abandoned them for, this
really ought to be weighed in the balance as well. Are you meeting the other’s true
needs? Might you be weakening your friend’s self-reliance? Good water is bad for
stopping up leaks. What is your effort and time really worth? Or does it not have
this kind of value? If decreasing yourself is done with a real economy, then nothing
much of value is lost. But think small. If you have but a small cache of seed for next
season, it is just as foolish to feed it to needy friends as it is to consume it yourself.
41.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.2: subverted appetite, dismiss norms, hunger in hills)
Worthwhile to be steadfast
To go boldly is ill-omened
Avoiding decrease increases one
41.2x Nine second merits steadfastness:
Concentrate in order to accomplish the goal
The master of the temple scrubs and waxes the floors, prepares the monk’s meals,
cleans up the altar and keeps the idol smoking. But for all of this humble service,
he doesn’t give anything up. These are the steps on his path, this is exactly the life
he has asked for, the price he has chosen to pay. The very nature of his position is a
hard look at th