... no Confucianism
either, or any other philosophical overtones - all added later ... ."     (internet post)
While context criticism has gained a rather broad acceptance, nobody
seems to have bothered to question its fundamental assumptions. The biggest
problem with this method is not philosophical or logical but statistical. You must
ask the question: Is the database or the sampling sufficient in size and scope to
yield statistically meaningful results? What is this database constituted of? How
much of the written language of the day is represented by the materials in our
possession? Is it possible that most of the writings of the day were set down on
materials more perishable than bone and bronze, and that the writings on more
16

imperishable materials represent a skewed s ample? Contemporaries of the Zhouyi
are extremely rare. The Shijing, the Book of Odes or Poetry, and the Shujing, the
Book of History or Documents are important examples of works purported to
have been written at roughly the same time. They even share a dozen or so
images each (e.g. Shu 5.25 & Shi 1.10.8; 2.5.1). But these are largely dismissed
because these texts may have been edited in the Warring States period, the Qin
dynasty and the Early Han. The context critics, pursuant to their rules of order,
have "moved to suppress" these as evidence. This leaves little but fragments of
these documents and a few other ancient records. The remainder is in the form of
cast bronze artifacts, usually commemorating some historical event, and the Shang
or Early Zhou dynasty "oracle bones," fragments of scapulae and tortoise
carapaces inscribed with official divination results. Note too that many of the
works which were contemporary with the Zhouyi belong to an entirely different
style or use of writing, such as ballad, narrative historical description and court
record. These meanings and applications might be much more specific or
mundane than those intended in the context of the Zhouyi. Etymological studies
of the Chinese characters can be useful to context critics as w ell, even though
nobody has cared to honestly admit the high degree to which this "science" is
speculative.
This leaves the largest part of the database in the form of the Shang oracle
bones. Unfortunately, a large percentage of these date from several centuries prior
to the Zhouyi's composition, and right in the middle o
f an era where the w ritten
language was evolving extremely quickly, and rapidly gaining more secular
applications. Also the many forms of divination itself were being reinvented,
considering that the Zhouyi itself was just such an attempt at reinvention (there
appear to have been at least two other attempts as well). On top of all of this mess,
some of the people who were charged with or responsible for the ongoing
development of the written language and the reinvention of the techniques of
divination were none other than the authors of the Zhouyi themselves. Oracle
bones may in fact be a system or tradition which the Zhouyi authors were
deliberately trying to depart from, replace or correct, not continue. But for some
reason the centuries old archaisms of the middle Shang are not considered by the
scholars to be one of the two kinds of anachronism. And so the modernists
biggest break with true certainty comes with its own rule to sever itself from
(what I would guess to be) 3/4 of the vocabulary of the era, and a lot of the
accepted alternative meanings for the characters, simply because they cannot find
any examples outside of the Zhouyi.
Conspicuously absent from the academics' discussions is the subject of
polysemy, words having or characterized by multiple meanings. The subject is so
obvious that this omission can only be due to its inconvenience to their
hypotheses. In English a word such as "strike" can mean: to organize a walkout,
to find a mineral deposit, to 
cross something out, to miss a ball with a bat, to hit
something, with or without a bat, or to light a match. All