ntical. Ba Gua meanings are sim pler, more
elemental. The Chong Gua incorporate complexities of meaning from the Zhen and
Hui G ua positions and dimensions of both reflectiveness and reflexiveness: the
elements take on an aspect of self-consciousness or self-awareness (similar in ways
to the Retrogradation of a Planet in Western Astrology). The Chong Gua  text
often discusses these added complexities.
463

zhen gua (bottom three lines) of  02, 23, 08, 20, 16, 35, 45, 12  000 
  
Kun, Bo, Bi, Guan, Yu, Jin, Cui, Pi
Accepting, Decomposing, Belonging, Perspective
Readiness, Expansion, Collectedness, Separating
On the bottom or within, Kun means work on the basis, one’s foundation and 
premises, broadening, getting context correct, being in the right place.
hui gua (top three lines) of 02, 15, 07, 46, 24, 36, 19, 11
Kun, Qian, Shi, Sheng, Fu, Ming Yi, Lin, Tai
Accepting, Authenticity, The Militia, Advancement
Returning, Brightness Obscured, Taking Charge, Interplay
On top or without, Kun means openness and realism, coming to grips with facts and 
givens, resigning oneself, working with, even celebrating reality.
Shao Yong: Tai Rou, The Greater Flexibility
Wind:    From the North, The Cold Wind
Time:    Hou Tian: Afternoon, Late Summer
   Xian Tian Midnight, Early Winter
Space:   Hou Tian Southwest
   Xian Tian North
Wai Guang (Compare counterparts)
Body: Belly, Female reproductive system, Endocrine system
Senses: Alimentary, Heat gain (warmth)
Arts: Mystic arts, Gratitude, Authenticity, Reverence
Virtu: (Sensitive) Chaos
Bindu: The Aura; and, with Kan 010, Chakra 4, Anahata, Heart
India: Dakshina Marga, The Right Hand Path
Zen: Both Bull and Self Transcended
Elements: Greater Earth
Qabalah: Mem; Path between Binah and Kether (Trad: Hd-Gb)
Binah, The 3rd Sephiroth, Understanding
Tarot: The Hanged Man; Aces and Threes; of Pentacles
Astrology: Neptune * (The Mystic)
*Note: Here again is the Chinese conception of Earth symbolized in the west by
Water. Interestingly, the Chinese Mawangdui text calls the Kun Chong Gua
Chuan (1439), Stream, Water or Flow. Curious, too, is that the mare is sacred to
Neptune, her creator in Greek mythology. Remember that in these symbolic
languages, the symbol is not what is being referred to: the symbol is only meant to
evoke a state of mind. Not the finger but the Moon.
464

Ba Gua 1, 00I, Gen, Stillness  
  
Key Words:  Embodying, securing, positing, accumulating, standing, maintaining
settling, defining, finishing, restraining, resisting, backing up, culminating, enduring
manifestation, identity, stature, domain, landmark, terms, confirmation, edifice, tact
touchstone, plateau, transition, repository, proximity, threshold, candor, attainment
composed, benevolent, magnanimous, steadfast, objective, genuine, conscientious
dependable, centered, circumscribed, inevitable, cohesive, stubborn, limited, static
concrete, contemplative, realized, guarded, principled, circumspect, quiet, attentive
The Symbolism: Gen, as mountain, is a symbol of individual existence, solid and
real for practical purposes, but only insofar as its foundation upon a greater reality
is secure, which requires that the basis be broader than the summit. Here, security,
composure and balance are inseparable. From below, the human perspective, the
big picture is grasped only when one is on top of things. Until the work is done to
get to this lofty place, the mountain is an obstacle, or limit to the grander view. To
be great means to be greatly grounded. Mountains are also thought of as the
centers of the w orld, hubs, poles, axes and reference points. And, of course, they
are home to the gods. This is half of the third dimension, things, as islands in time.
Glosses from the Text:
52.M gen 3327 52.0 Stillness, checking, restraint, See Glossary
52.0 bei 4989 52.0 Back, spine; background, past
52.0 huo 2412 17.4 Grasp, seize, take, hold, secure
52.0 shen 5718 158+0 Being, body, selfhood, person
52.1 yong 7589 02.7 Prolonged, lasting, endurin