rs to float himself up
and out of this muck. The greater part of this burden is just simple self-indulgence.
Ill-will, resentment, rancor and enmity will all try to look like truth, though the truths
needed now are things that will lift against gravity, and lots more fresh, clean water.
Nothing is solid here, there is no core of firmness to speak to or from. Words keep
changing their meanings. But at least the water pools first in the deeper depressions.
335

47.M, Key Words
Surrounded, afflicted, beset, distressed, trapped, oppressed, cramped, hemmed in
Hard pressed, squeezed; feeling defeated; running on reserves, vapors and fumes
Victimized, bothered, disheartened, wretched, depleted, fatigued, weary, used up
Lowest ebbs, dregs, being drained, spent; futility, pessimism, nihilism, suffering
Depression; using the last ounce, getting the sp irit back, lightening up, enduring
Melancholy, delirium, illusion, despond, swamp gas visions, wits end, emptiness
47.G, From the Glossary
kun4 (a, the) affliction, oppression, extremity, distress, exhaustion, entanglement,
fatigue, anxiety; (to be) distressed, afflicted, beset, oppressed, surrounded, beaten,
impoverished, diminished, belabored, bothered, disheartened, exhausted, fatigued,
tired (out), vexed, trapped, besieged, surrounded, confined, entangled, pressured,
constrained, hard pressed, pinned down, penned in, squeezed, enclosed, (nearly)
defeated (by, in, with); extreme; (to) obstruct, distress, exhaust (s, ed, ing)
47.T, Tuan Zhuan
Exhaustion
The firm (is) covered over
To risk leads to satisfaction
(To be) beset and still not lose that which is fulfilling
One who is truly a noble young one attains this
Persistence (is) the mature human being’s promise:
By way of the firmness within
There will be words but no assurance:
To value the oral leads to exhaustion
336

47.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.1: responsive joy, promising)
With bottom belabored by a wooden cane
Going into the valley of gloom
For three years not seen face to face
47.1x Going into the valley of gloom:
The gloom has no vision
He gets himself spanked. He gets his butt whipped. This has really only hurt him
the first time, the time that it actually happened. But now he plays the scene over and
over again in his mind and the sentiment turns to resentment. The negative feedback
loops him back onto himself, beginning a cycle of darkened mood that could last for
the next three years. Such feelings do not know time, other than always and never.
This valley of gloom is one deep depression, one truly great rut, surrounded on all
three sides by high, insurmountable walls. As long as his attention is here, his back
will be turned to the water’s way out of the valley. Maybe he just wants to be beaten,
or to be a beaten down soul. Maybe he secretly thinks that he deserves this, over and
over again. How hard can turning around be? It is three years of this kind of effort.
47.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.2: drawn to the promising, sincerity before reward)
Oppressed before wine and food
Scarlet-sashed nobles arrive with direction
Worthwhile and productive to offer up a sacrifice
Initiative seems foreboding
But this avoids mistakes
47.2x Oppressed before wine (and) food:
Balance will have (its) rewards
He slouches at the feast, surrounded by good meat and drink, poking at his food.
The nobles rush in on a mission, looking for help, offering great rewards for small
favors, but the weary one lets them pass by unheeded. Maybe the wealth and good
fortune would mess up his life. This may have been the answer he wasn’t seeking,
the chance to get himself snagged on something that was in motion, but the way out
comes and then goes, and it’s likely that they will only bother him once. The thing
with the food set before him is that it’s fuel. If he only could work up an appetite
and sacrifice some of this stuff to his higher purpose. Or maybe he could sacrifice
some of his losses and poor expec