every human culture at any stage of its
development across the ages is that of a counselor. Modern counselors are simply
filling in an ancient function. It is not the shaman's world view that is derived
from the culture around him - almost by definition he gets most of this from the
next world over, and from his mentors and predecessors within his own tradition.
What he does get from his immediate culture is the set of acceptable forms that are
expected of him, the terms and the rituals that his insights must be recast in terms
of before he can meet his client's numerous and complex expectations. This work,
explicitly known as "the great work of the transformation of humankind," has
always had to be pragmatic in this way. It is simply unfortunate that the climate of
37

expectation within which the shaman must effect the work is so often charged
with glamor and illusion.
An anecdote might be helpful here. In the early 1970's I went to stay with
a shaman who served an island's population in an hereditary capacity. The local
culture was beginning to move into the present era and had stopped practicing
cannibalism a few decades earlier. The missionaries had begun the first stages of
global enculturation - sixty miles from the nearest town the natives were now
showering with their clothes on because they now knew their bodies were evil.
But this shaman lived deeper into the rainforest and had never spoken with a
white man before. I came to him bringing two questions: 1) In my culture it is
believed that a person needs to be down as well as up, unhappy as well as happy,
depressed as well as elated. Do you agree, or is it possible to be up, happy and
elated all of the time? [I was asking if he was a counselor] and 2) I have been a
student of people who perform your function in other societies and know some
things about their methods. If I share some of these with you, will you share some
of yours with me? His reply to me: "When you are up you have accepted your
power, when you are down you have abandoned it. So instead of com plaining,
you decide what you want. Then to answer your second question, if you have
accepted your power, these methods will come from you naturally. If you have
abandoned your power, you can learn everything there is to know about t hese
methods and they will still do you no good. Now why are you still here?" Here is
a man from a culture that is far more primitive than the Zhou court, yet his degree
of comprehension, his understanding of the human psyche, is already a few orders
of magnitude greater than one who frets about the hopping of goats, the cleaving
of shins or the twitching of captives.
Linguistically we should also ask: just how much difference was 
there in
speech between the peasant and the aristocrat? There must have been at least a
little stratification between high and low, the noble and the more common forms
of speech. Unfortunately we have no extant records of this, except that we might
consider the language of the Shijing to be significantly more accessible to a
broader class of people. But the Zhouyi was not spoken, and it was written for
the most literate class of people. Certainly in the written language there would
have been a much wider gap, with illiteracy being the norm, and the people who
were most involved with the creation and development of the written language
being in the top strata and the nearest to the king. The differences in social strata
clearly should cause further complications for the context c ritic, but they do not
even slow down for these. Consider what it might have been like to be on the
leading cultural edge. Instead off being a slave to the popular superstitions, you
could play with them creatively, linguistically and poetically. You could take
images drawn from more ancient practices of divination and turn them into
metaphors. You could hide humorous insights deep inside the puzzle like Easter
eggs. Above all, as one specialized in studying the unfolding of life