thout question into his study of the Yi. While the effort was made to organize
Yixue into its historical streams, and to separate the original from the commentary,
there was an enormously greater amount of data written in and available from the
Han Dynasty. This proved to be something of a distraction, although it had its
merits. There was still the inclination to view the Yijing in terms of Han ideas
because there were so many Han ideas at hand. What this distracted the Hanxue
scholars from was the need to separate the Zhouyi from the commentary in the
Wings. And so the Hanxue J ia, while doing much to strip the Yi of post-Han
perspectives, did not succeed nearly as well in stripping the Yi of its Confucian
influence, or that of the Yinyang J ia and its tributaries, which included the Wu
Xing, the calendars, and other extraneous dimensions.
The Hanxue effort is noted for its cataloguing and organization of the great
mass of material available on the Yi, volumes still extant which numbered in the
thousands. In 
the Kangxi period (1662-1722) this was to culminate, in 1715, in
the publication of an official, Imperial Edition of the Yijing, making use of the best
available sources, together with a body of important appended material. This
effort was led by Li Guangdi (1642-1718) and the text is the Zhouyi zhezhong.
This is “received text” used here in the present translation.
526

Finally, in a note of both historical and academic interest, the oft-told story of
Leibnitz needs some clarification. Wolfgang Wilhelm von Leibnitz (1656-1730)
was the German philosopher and mathematician who invented differential and
integral calculus. During a period of correspondence with one Father Joachim
Bouvet, a Jesuit missionary in China, which lasted from 1697-1702, Leibnitz was
sent copies of the Yijing and the binary Xian Tian  work of Shao Yong because
they appeared to contain information of mathematical interest. Many of today’s
English language editions claim (or leave implied) that this led to L eibnitz’s
“discovery” of binary numbers. This was not the case. Leibnitz had published his
De Progressione Dyadica in 1679, thirty years earlier. This was an independent
discovery, and it had the further advantage of the use of the number zero, a tool
which Shao Yong lacked. In fact, while Shao Yong demonstrated a fac ility for
complex mathematical calculations in his methods of divination, it is likely that he
derived his binary or Xian Tian sequence of the Hexagrams using simple graphics
which required no particular mathematical knowledge or skill. What the famous
correspondence accomplished was the renewal of Leibnitz’s interest in the binary
system, and the publication of Explication de l’Arithmetique Binaire , in 1703, in
which Shao Yong, and China’s Zhouyi authors, were given credit for discovering
the basis of the binary system.
527

A Yijing Chronology, by Dynasty
* Dates prior to the 8th century BCE use the Bamboo Annals, 281 CE, as a benchmark
The reliability of this system of dating has not been established.
* Underlined numbers locate historical references found in the Zhouyi.
* Abbreviations (Han dynasty onward): XS: Xiang Shu trend; YL: Yi Li trend.
* Family names in Chinese are written first, titles are written second.
27th >1994 The Legendary Period
27th cent: Fu Xi, the legendary first sovereign, who (like Thoth, Hermes & Odin elsewhere) 
created or discovered a magical alphabet in the Ba Gua.
1994>1523 The  Xia Culture (The Still Unverified Xia Dynasty)
20th cent: Wang Hai (34.5, 56.6), an early legendary pioneer in animal (cattle) husbandry 
who lost his success, his cattle, and perhaps his life, in the state of Yi, through the 
overconfidence or heedlessness brought by success. A pun on the word Yi, meaning 
changes and easy (i.e. sometimes too easy).
1523>1027 Shang (Yin) Dynasty
c.1523: Cheng Tang, Tang the Successful (49.T), the founding sovereign of the Shang, who
was perceived by the Zhou founders as wresting the Mandate