nother. If divination means "predicting the future" then
the Yijing is nothing more than what the sheep think it is: a fortune telling device.
And if divination means simply "uncovering the hidden" then the scope of the
Yijing can comfortably embrace even depth psychology. We can be fairly certain
that the original text, the  Zhouyi  or the Changes of Zhou, was not the text of
metaphysical philosophy that it would later be read and "known" as. However,
this is not to say it is not a text of moral or ethical philosophy. Complicating
things further, the Zhouyi  represents an attempt to redefine or reinvent divination
itself, in accord with or integrally to the Zhou dynasty’s "Mandate of Heaven,"
the new order of that day, so what little we know of the methods which immedi-
ately preceded it cannot be considered an entirely reliable foundation.
It is also important to understand 
that it was drafted at a time when the
language, particularly as written, was still forming, moving from mnemonic device
to a medium for the transmission of culture to future generations, fr om having the
ability to evoke recollection of things already known to having the ability to
convey ideas to someone with no experience of the subject matter. W ritten
language had evolved fr om nearly four thousand characters at the time of the
Shang oracle bones to roughly eight at the time of the founding of the Zhou
(estimates here vary widely). We are witnessing written language in a vital and
vigorous period of its evolution here. And authors who have the Sovereign's ear,
and something much more serious than His feedback, are coining words and
introducing new ideas along with them, or using older words and adding newer
meanings with the complicity or the agreement of the remainder of a very small
and intellectually mobile social circle around the throne. It was also written at one
of political history's rare fulcrum points, akin in ways to the "Founding Fathers"
period in US history, im mediately before the Constitution would become an
obstacle to the government it created. In other words, it helped to create one of
those oxymoronic "liberal institutions." It was a day well-seized, even if the
changes were not as sweeping, deep and lasting as the book's authors might have
1

liked. They at least got their ideas down in a format that allowed them to send
these ideas through or across long expanses of time.
It sounds rather trivially true, but this is the point most often forgotten in
the study of this work: the book did not write itself. It was written by a group of
human beings. It is a real rarity to find anyone who even tries to find the authors'
point of view, though of course such an attempt would have its pitfalls. Not being
a fan of Derrida, I consider the search for author intent to be a legitimate exercise.
Maybe this is the bottom line: This is a book about what it means to be a human
being confronted with choices, especially choices of attitude. And we can also
say this: what this book lacks in length, it more than makes up for in breadth and
depth. It will expand to fill any room your mind makes for it.
Students of the Book of Changes, the I Ching, or the Yijing as it is now
spelled, will at some time be called upon to believe one or more of the following
claims. All eight of these statements are False:
1) At roughly 5000 years of age, the Zhouyi (the oldest layer of the Yijing)
is the world's oldest book.
2) The Yijing is founded upon a philosophy which describes Change as a
product of the interaction of the two universal forces known as Yin and Yang.
3) The original and primary intent of the Yijing is to divine the future or to
foretell one's destiny. Only centuries later did it become a philosophical treatise
and a handbook used to inform ethical behavior.
4) The Ten Wings (which, together with the original text, or the  Zhouyi ,
constitute the Yijing) are a reliable introduction to the thought pr ocesses of the
original authors and present the di