en beings portrayed in the
struggles for power. Some might think to ask: what  or whose needs do the enemies
serve? No social contract cannot be rewritten. No rules of engagement are sacred.
Enjoying diversity overcomes differences better than making both sides the same.
13.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 49: Ge, Seasonal Change
(Fan Yao 49.6: leopard transforms, common folk change masks)
Fellowship with others on the frontier
Nothing to regret
13.6x Fellowship with others on the frontier:
The goals (are) not yet achieved
Let’s end the debate with a compromise: Some of us evolved and some never did.
Perspective softens frustration - great things take time in large portions. So today
a few of the males rejoice with some of the females in the high mountain meadows
and wide open fields. This world is not yet at peace, nor is humankind more than
halfway evolved. No guarantees exist of continued human existence. The greatest
truths are still mysteries. No creature comes down from the sky to right all wrong.
Nor yet has the night sky returned a glad echo. The cosmos is quiet and still much
too big. This tribe which has gathered this day is a marginal fringe on an uncharted
ground. But the cult is the seed of a culture and humankind is best adapted to live
in these small bands. Below in the meadow life embraces life. Good things begin.
135

13, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 07, Shi, The Militia
qian gua (inverse): 14, Da You, Big Domain
jiao gua (reverse): 14, Da You, Big Domain
hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
13, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Tipareth in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Six of Swords
* Astrology: Sol in Air
13, Quotations
* The world does not know that we must all come to an end here, but those who
know it - their quarrels cease at once. —Buddha,  The Dhammapada
* The bowels of existence do not speak to man, except as man. —Nietzsche
* “Know thyself” is a good saying, but not in all situations. In many it is better to
say “know others.” —Menander
* No man can have society upon his own terms. If he seek it, he must serve it too.
—Emerson
* A wise man associating with the vicious becomes an idiot; a dog traveling with
good men becomes a rational being. —Arabic proverb
* Whoever is not a misanthrope at forty years can never have loved mankind.
—Sebastien Chamfort
* The only thing you will ever be able to say in the so-called 'social' sciences is:
"Some do, some don't”. —Ernst Rutherford
* Hell is other people. —Jean Paul Sartre
* A wise man gets more use from his enemies than a fool from his friends.
—Baltasar Gracian
136

GUA 14, DA4 YOU3, BIG DOMAIN
 
  Binary 111 101 = 61; Qian below, Li above
14.X, Overall Image
Flame in heaven above
Big domain
The noble young one, accordingly,
suppresses the bad and promotes the good
Accepting heaven’s terms and higher laws
Flame from the skies: the squandered power of affluent suns, a trust for the wise
and the strong, is fought for and over by proud humankind. Much of earth’s mass
is made of precious metal, first fused in the cores of stars; the precious jewels were
made in the depths of our world. We are not  smart enough to claim these in place,
so we mine and extract our few insignificant bits and then, with our fires and flames,
we make choices and values to guide them. We, too, are as gods, really small ones,
authoring good and evil, trying to add a clearer perception to strength. Such powers
command by their nature, but this all begins with the power to give things a value.
14.0, Big domain
Supreme fulfillment
Amounts and degrees of possession and power are not any measure of greatness.
To admire or want things in proper amounts and degrees gives them worth. Folks
somehow come up with ideas of what is good and bad, of what is worth having, or
worth letting be, or worth fighting for or against. The weights and standards are set.
Economies and values, rates of appreciation and interest, what constitutes a prize or
endowment: all these are settled and fixed int