or even better, by simply being authentic and sincere in our quests.
With or without a set rit ual, a session of divination is best prepared for by
choosing an environment which is free of distractions, quieting your mind and
45

concentrating upon the question at hand. The question should be as specific as
possible, especially regarding the span of time involved, and it should be w ritten
down beforehand, to keep that monkey, Mind, from turning the question around
retroactively. This is the form which will frame the response and its terms. Again,
in the Yijing tradition, the real source of wisdom is not in the answers one gets in
life, but in one’s ability to question in life, to inquire into the Nature of the world
and the Time. So rather than trying to get in touch with that all-knowing Teacher
within, try instead to contact the Learner within, keep the know-it-all out of the
process, and ask a single, unambiguous, carefully crafted question. The Shujing,
or Book of History, recommends divination in times of “great doubt,” when other
recourses have failed. Maintaining doubt, even in minor matters, helps to ensure
objectivity and impartiality, or better still, that one has new information.
I will not say much about if, how or why the response you receive is True, in
the fa miliar sense of the word. Truth, to a Yijing perspective, might best be
described with an archery metaphor: trueness is a description of one’s aim and
intent, and one trues one’s aim through experience. The Chinese word for this is
Zhong (as well as Fu and Xin). This character depicts an arrow through a target.
The word also means heart, core, balance, center, and con-centration (to be
concentric, or gathered around a center). The response, rather than the answer,
will be a metaphor. It is up to the inquirer to make sense of this, with the first
recourse being to the terms and frame of
 the question. It is up to the diviner to
divine. It is not at all like being spoon-fed. The big rule is, as always, Live and
Learn. To develop competence at this, keep a journal, and keep looking back at
the quality of your previous interpretations.
Divining with Metal: The Coin Oracle. This method, called zhan k e, goes
back at least to the Song dynasty, maybe to the Tang. Take three coins at a time
in your hands, shake them, while concentrating on your question, and let them
fall. Sum the two’s and three’s and note the total. Repeat the process until you
have six lines (each with a number between six and nine) and construct the
Hexagram as discussed in the last segment. If a coin rolls away, read it where it
falls. If it is standing on edge against an obstacle, and you have less than four
lines by this point, try looking at the Xiao Gua  or the Small Symbol which t hese
three-or-less lines depict. If not, toss all three coins again.
Divining with Wood: The Yarrow Stalk Oracle. The yarrow stalk method,
known as bu shi, is ancient, originating at least in the Early Zhou. It is referred to
(at xcI.9) in a way which suggests the method might have rem ained essentially
the same. But it is also possible that what we now have is attributable to Zhuxi of
the Song dynasty, and mer ely reconstructed from clues i
n older texts. Before
describing the method, however, I need to discuss a mathematical problem which
this method may or may not have always contained. During the few years prior to
1974, I had begun to notice that the Yi’s response, when I was using the stalk
method, tended or inclined towards advice to slow down, even though the choice
of the method itself indicated one’s willingness to do so. I never guessed that the
reason for this might be in the probabilities, which I never bothered to investigate.
The January, 1974 issue of Scientific American  featured an article by Martin
46

Gardner on the Mathematics of the “I Ching,” which discusses t hese
probabilities. For the coin method, the odds are 1/8, 3/8, 3/8 and 1/8 for 6, 7, 8 and
9 respectively. For the bu s hi method