ing each comprehension one small step at a time,
steadying the human will. “As above, so below,” he might say. But the worth of
this will be tested. If they think too much of themselves, and tread too far too fast
on little more than presumptions, they will merit no safety and the game falls apart.
10.0, Treading
on the tiger’s tail
When it does not bite one,
Success
Just who we really are can be some of who we think we are. The heavens give us
some room to play around with this. Sometimes we are what we get away with, but
the hope for a clean getaway sets some rules. Strength being a cousin to tolerance,
the good-natured tiger permits man some pride in his dreamwork. More humored
than threatened, it might need truly offensive behavior to make him turn and bite.
But what offensive may mean will be his idea, not ours. We want to give ourselves
courage to step up and into our destiny, we want to tread as far as we can and test
the bounds of the possible and we try to define the right rules of conduct to enable
our highest functions. But we don’t always want to know when and where to stop.
To tell us this is not what the tiger’s teeth smile for: this is our idea. The gods that
tell us when and where to go are also our idea. Sometimes we, or our gene pools,
are wise enough to learn from death and extinction. And yet we have not yet, for
instance, learned about war, or what civilized behaviors can be sustained for ages.
In time our failures to die might define us, and what survives we might call correct.
113

10.M, Key Words
Conduct, deportment, tact, correctness, concordance; taking steps, actualizing
Treading carefully, circumspect behavior, action’s meetness, conscientiousness
Audacious steps, challenge, haza rding, strategy, performance; tests, tr ials, rites
To carry out, honor; living up to standards; walking the walk, finding right track
Procedure, protocol; divine guardianship on terms not your own; reality check
Perform as ‘move through form’; function properly; testing faith, tempting fate
10.G, From the Glossary
lu3 (to) step, take steps, take a step, tread, walk, trample (on, upon); perform,
conduct oneself, carry (on, out), honor, fulfill (s, ed, ing); (a, the) step, footstep
(s); shoes, sandals; conduct, behavior, path, track, performance, ceremony, function;
respectful conduct, heedful conduct
10.T, Tuan Zhuan
Respectful conduct:
The flexible treads upon the firm
Pleasure, but also attunement with the creative
And so it is that treading upon the tiger’s tail,
Without (it) biting one, (is) success
The firm (is) central (and) correct
Taking steps in a divine place, and yet escaping suffering,
shows wisdom
114

10.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.1: not prolonging certain affairs, small will talk)
Simply treading forward
Nothing wrong
10.1x Simple treading’s progress:
All alone, (but) going forward (with) hope
He only walks and nothing more. He does not even amble or stroll. He makes no
demands, takes no risks, seeks no adventure, leaves no footprints. You could say
he was taking one step at a time, but he’s not even counting that high. Along this
old road the talk about tigers faded long centuries past. And the tigers themselves
went away when the road was first built. It is hardly a thin line to tread, where the
consequences of each step are known at the moment the foot falls. As it has been
and was proven so long ago, the path is correct because it is safe. He can do li ttle
else but advance without error. But this in itself is much. Everyday suchness is no
mean attainment for bright and enlightened beings. The bland, simple men do this
without thinking, they merely tread through a smaller world in a tinier sliver of time.
10.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.2: not plowing to harvest, still have direction)
Treading the path which is level and easy
The secluded one’s persistence is promising
10.2x The secluded one’s persistence (is) promising:
The middle avoids the source o