China to replace the 
Wade-Giles system of transliteration (see below to compare).
The traditional Chinese characters, used in the Zhouyi Zhezhong, are called 
Han Zi (the Han characters); they are still used in Taiwan and Hong Kong. 
Simplified characters are now used on the mainland.
* There are only 411 Pinyin syllables. Most of these pronounce a large number of 
different Chinese characters. Pronunciation is further modified by four tones
which further narrow the meanings.
* Each character is pronounced as one syllable. Diphthongs (combined vowels) 
are spoken quicky, not drawn out. Modern Chinese is much more multiple- 
character and polysyllabic than it was in the days of the Yijing’s origin.
* Retroflex means pronounced with the tip of the tongue turned back or up 
towards the hard palate, or the gums behind the upper canines.
* Sounds are Aspirated with the breath (like P), Voiced with the larynx (like B). 
More aspirated  means a stronger puhff of air.
Initial Sounds:
b b, a little softer and a little less voiced than English
c ts, as in bats eat cats
ch ch, retroflexed, as in wit ch hunt
d d, a little softer and a little less voiced than English
f f, no surprises, as in fan
g g, a little softer and a little less voiced than English, not soft as in huge
h h, a little more aspirated and a little more gutteral than English
j dzh as in jump, but the tongue is a little more forward than in English
k k, a little more aspirated than English
l l, no surprises, as in lily
m m, no surprises, as in madman
n n, no surprises, as in ninny
p p, a little more aspirated than English
q ch, no surprises, as in cheap chicken
r r, r as in run, but with a hint of a z or buzzing sound on top of it
s s, no surprises, as in simplicity
sh sh, retroflexed, as in fi sh hook, or sch as in Schubert
t t, a little more aspirated than English
w w, no surprises, as in win
x sh, but with a hint of an s
y y, no surprises, as in yes
z dz, as in a dze or adds
zh j, retroflexed, dzh, or dge as in fu dge. 
Not zh as in vision.
484

Final Sounds:
a ah
a after y, as in yam
ai aye
an ahn as in autobahn, not as in tan
an after y, ehn as in y en
ang ah+ng, as in ankh, not ang as in hang
ao ow as in how n ow
e between eh and uh, as in al ert
e after y, as in y et
ê used alone, eh
ei ae as in bay
en uhn, as in un
eng ung as in sung, but abbreviate the vowel, not eng as in strength
er uhr, as in sir or surly or early
i ee as in eat
i after c, s, z: between ee and oh, an unstressed uh
i after ch, r, sh, & zh: er as in herd, but shorten the r and voice with a
ia ya                            hint of a z or buzz
ian yen
iang yang
iao yow, with ow as in pow
ie yeh as in yet
in in
ing ing as in sing
iong üng, see ü, between yoong and yeeng
iu yowh as in yolk
o between awe and owe as on p ort
ong uwng, as in lung but with a little more oo, not as in long
ong after y, oong with more ee, üng, as in German yüng
ou between ou and oa, as in out, boat
u oo as in bl ue moon
ü after j, l, q, x, y, like French & German, form to say oo but say ee
ua wa
uai wai as in winding
uan wahn as in wan
uang wah+ng
ue wuh
ue after j, q, x, y, weh as in wet
üe in lüe and nüe, between oo and ee plus eh
ui way
un un as in fun but with u as in put and abbreviate the vowel
uo waw with second w shortened
485

Pinyin to Wade-Giles Conversion
Phonetic elements and syllables not found in this table are the same in both
systems.
Pinyin: Wade-Giles Pinyin: Wade-Giles Pinyin: Wade-Giles
b... p...                    ...e ...o chi ch’ih
c... ts’...                 ...ian ...ien ci tz’u
ch... ch’...                  ...ie ...ieh gui kuei
d... t...                        ...iong ...iung ju chu
g... k...                      ...ong ...ung juan chuan
j... ch...                   ...ue ...ueh jue chueh
k... k’...                   ...uo ...o jun chun
p... p’... kui k’uei
q... ch’...                  e o, eh lue lueh
r... j...                      er erh ri jih
t... t’...                     o wo shi shih
x..