the Characters
09.T Tuan Zhuan or Commentary on the Judgment, Wings 1 & 2
This commentary is sometimes (but not always) relevant
09.6, Top 9 Yao Ci or Changing Line Text.
The Original Zhouyi Line Statements
09.6x Xiao Xiang or Little Images, Comments on the Yao Ci
Part of Wings 3 & 4
This commentary is sometimes (but not always) relevant
Zhi Gua 05 The Changed Gua or Resultant Hexagram
Fan Yao 05.6 The resonant line in the Zhi Gua. This is not part of the Yi’s
response, but it may hold clues to the Changing Line’s meaning
09,
Dimensions
Several of the key Wing and Han structural dimensions
See Dimensions. Find: 09, D ***
09, Notes Footnotes to the asterisks (*) in the Simple Translation
09,
Wai Guang
Outside Illustrations or External Examples
Correspondences from three other systems, See Dimensions
09,
Quotations
Illustrations from world literature to illustrate some aspects and
other implications of the Gua themes
56

GUA 01, QIAN2, CREATING
 
  Binary 111 111 = 63; Qian below, Qian above; Chong Gua
01.X, Overall Image
Heaven moves inexhaustibly
The noble young one, accordingly,
is naturally energetic, without rest
Heaven and heaven only, in motion as always, and at least twice as great as anyone
thought to think. And forever is only half spent, so things could go twice this far.
Life’s little part in forever is heaven evolving to learn of itself, a great work indeed,
and a lifetime of great work wants a lasting supply of power, with strength to create
and not merely endure. We things and selves are too finite and humble to have this.
To team up with the power that drives the stars is to feed on nature’s momentum,
to move with nature’s inertia and thus to act in accord with the time. True sorcery
uses this source, but the power even to know this requires both patience and sense.
01.0, Creating
The greatest fulfillment rewards persistence
Many would make this out to be some magical formula. It begins our sacred text,
and so it cannot be simple. First-rate satisfaction is not a thing to wish or pray for.
This is not so mysterious: li fe’s most rewarding moments express higher powers:
they follow sustained hard work, come along with persistence and repay dedication.
Power is the tempo of change, power does work, and work is even its measure.
A dragon is what dragon does, not just what he wishes and dreams he could be.
And much is given to dragons, including the power to fail in spectacular ways.
At the source, where a self is simply a short lived nexus of forces and choices,
where causes get knotted up for a while, the earth’s humble network of entities,
including its highest gods, are no more than li ttle children, reaching out to know.
Life seems driven in just one direction, out of and over itself, and into the untried.
The highest offering, the greatest sacrifice, might be to give back some of these lives
to make a better world, to make it sublime, as the sun lifts the water into the clouds.
The purpose or plan to all this is life’s art,  and even  divine force learns as it grows.
57

01.M, Key Words
Higher purpose, self-actualizing drives, autonomy, calling, vocation, star quality
Sovereignty, command, self-mastery, dragonhood, genius, authority, cogency
Diligence, drive, lasting energy, enduring vigor, persistence or duration in time
Higher or ders, design, innovation; co-authoring with the infinite, dynamic life
Positing, originality, initiative; sublimation, sunlight transforming water to vapor
Perspective from outside of humanity, attunement to higher rhythms & purposes
01.G, From the Glossary
Qian2 (to be) cre ative, vigorous, energetic, potent, dynamic, constant, enduring,
lasting; dry,  clean; exhausted; heavenly; (a, the) creation, initiative, authority,
sovereignty, design, cogency, autonomy, command, energy, diligence, persis-
tence, endurance, mastery, genius, higher order, higher purpose, calling, vocation,
enduring activity, lasting vigor, dynamic living, dragonhood; heaven; warmth of
the sun; vigorous appeara