1) An omen or 'peasant interpretation' text ... and 2) a divination text
probably of later date and certainly of a far more sophisticated nature." (p121)
He further divides omen texts into three categories: a) substantive inexplicable
sensations and involuntary movements, b) those concerning plants, animals and
birds, and c) those concerning natural phenomena. (p122)
Exactly why the  Zhouyi  authors are thought by the academics to be so
incapable of the conscious use of si mple m etaphors and analogies to depict
common recognizable patterns of activity in the world is a subject for a later
section. At the moment I only want to question the idea of a layered text. Can we
really assume that there is no real connection between the so-called omen texts
and the mantic formulae? I really don't see any evidence of this. I do see evidence
that the text is comprised of elements from two or more sets of vocabulary, sets
which most likely originated in different times and places, but this does not mean
they were set down here in different times and places. If I were writing a text
which required knowledge of both psychological counseling and astrology, and
if I expected my readers to be a little familiar with both, I would mix the two in the
same sentence. And maybe I would even have reasons to enumerate things or
add them together. Does this imply that the text has three historical layers, the
oldest dating from the origin of counting? Of course not. I am going to take the
unpopular view that the text hangs together in a such meaningful way as to
suggest that it was set down as a whole with a vocabulary which represents a
synthesis of terminologies.
Naturally some of the images date from earlier centuries, and a significant
number of them may indeed have begun their long careers as "omen or ' peasant
interpretation' texts." This does not mean that they were assembled as nothing
more than a collection of diviners' omens to remind diviners of things they already
knew. They were more plausibly reused here with the addition of newer and
deeper insights which 
had been gained within the small circle for which the text
was written. The m etaphors and analogies depicting recognizable patterns of
activity in the world are simply integrated with a vocabulary describing the
probable outcomes of those patterns. I see the "divination text" as simply a set of
oft repeated vocabulary elements, the lingo that diviners were expected to utter.
These were derived over the centuries from practical divination experience.
A simpler expression of this is "images in the [Yijing are used] as metaphors
and analogies which function normatively to indicate a basis for decision as to
appropriate action in a given situation" (G. Tung p1) or "to provide a perspective
on experience which can lead to insight and decision for action." ( ibid p60).
They simply provide a vehicle for perception, and the key to the utility of the
vehicle is its mobility. It is thus, from this perspective, important to avoid defining
or construing the meaning of a metaphor or analogy too narrowly.
7

The application of the prognostications, of good and bad fortune, etc., to
the likely development or outcome of the metaphor or analogy, as opposed to
considering the mantic terms to be hard predictions of the future in the real world,
is indeed a more mature way of looking at and into the future. The various mantic
formulae or prognostications pronouncing pitfalls, stress or hard work would not
be pointing directly to problems inhering in the future, but to problems inhering in
some of the attitudes and behaviors described by the metaphor or analogy. This is
perfectly consistent with an understanding that one's fate is not predetermined.
The question becomes: Were the people already that mature three thousand years
ago? Well, a lot of people are still not that mature. So let's ask instead: were a few
of the people, the people at the creative vanguard of their culture, already that
mature thre