depth. This fellowship admits only one clan.
They only seek similarities to their own superior persons. Thus even their gods look
like members. They will fashion and arm their devils from everything not their own.
When they journey across the great water they drag the familiar along and make a
big deal out of spreading their ways. They think of themselves as especially chosen
and as given the only truth. But this is inbred and incestuous. And thus they spawn
monsters while thinking to breed some superior race. Superior man is their sacrifice.
133

13.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.3: tethered ox, drifter’s gain, townsfolks’ disaster)
Caching weapons in the underbrush
Climbing one’s highest hill
Three years without rising up
13.3x Caching weapons in the underbrush:
The rivalry (is) strong
* Three years with no exuberance:
Security in action
He really tried hard to find fellows among the others, but his trust is easily broken.
In life one can reach out to many wrong someones. Imagine your view of the odds
when this happens on the first trip beyond. It might take three years to come back.
Suspicion mounts. When looking for possible enemies the suspects are everywhere;
any divergence or slight disagreement means enmity. Thus he makes no loud noises,
no demonstrations, no startled movements. But as safe as these years might be from
attack, they are also silent, empty and joyless. Better to use those years up on the hill
as time to ponder the broader horizons, the view from the top to look for better ways
down and to learn what he thought was coldness was not really caring. Have three
years been wasted? Not if one’s real opponents are now known as fear and mistrust.
13.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.4: enriching the family, full of promise)
Mounting those battlements
But not capable of attack
Promising
13.4x Mounting those battlements
Means that nothing can be done
* One’s promise
(Is) due to being distressed and then revising the principles
Equipped to face the great world with a courage and caution both learned at home,
he takes the evening watch and climbs the town’s wall with his spears, more ready
for encounters in the sense of self-defense. Scouting from above, awaiting some
sign of foes to menace his line, his gaze keeps coming back to the grizzly band of
tough looking nomads camped outside of the gate, scarred up, missing limbs and
presumably teeth. They are probably telling insightful and humorous stories, but he
hears only ominous mumbling. That’s a kerchief on the big one’s belt, not scalps.
At least from up here he can watch how people behave, although this is less than
the wealth of those stories. He dares not open the gate and invite them in to dinner.
Going out would change him. Is he not a captive here, in this his own home town?
134

13.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 30: Li, Arising
(Fan Yao 30.5: tears streaming like water, grief, good fortune)
Fellowship with others begins with wailing and weeping
but then follows with laughter
Mighty armies can entertain each other
13.5x Fellowship with others with such a beginning:
Through balance (comes) orientation
* Mighty armies entertaining each other:
Praising each other’s abilities
We are forced by our fate into fellowship and condemned to this earth with billions
of parasites: the poor ones intrude on our pockets, sick ones intrude on our health,
old ones discourage our lofty ambitions and dead ones remind us too much of time.
Those with a different language or color are not much better than beasts. And only
two men with bad will, armies and opposite views, can double all of these problems.
Those who have crossed some great streams in their lives and longed for home from
the far distant shores, know that these others are not the alien beings portrayed in the
struggles for power. Some might think to ask: what  or whose needs do the enemies
serve? No social contract cannot be rewritten. No rules of engagement are sacred.
Enjoying