word such as "strike" can mean: to organize a walkout,
to find a mineral deposit, to 
cross something out, to miss a ball with a bat, to hit
something, with or without a bat, or to light a match. All of these can be nouns as
well. But the Chinese language is, and always has been, many times more
polysemous than English. Chinese has only a twentieth the number of words that
17

English does, so aside from the very specific nouns (there is only one dragon, one
tiger) each word is required to carry much more duty. In the Zhouyi, for example,
the word Xu1 (2847) means "beard" at 22.2, "female bondservant" at 54.3 and
"necessity" at 05.T. It is only the context in which the word is situated (more on
this later) that illuminates the meaning intended. Even the modernists translate
this particular character as polysemous. Why is it then, when these people decide
in favor of a particular gloss, the discussion is over and done? The discovery and
verification of one particular gloss does not constitute any kind of evidence or
proof that this was an original or a primary meaning, just as the fact that
something is absent to one's perception is no proof that it does not exist.
Take, for example, the Zhouyi character traditionally glossed as Truth or
Confidence, but now glossed strictly as Prisoner of War by the academics, as the
captives who titter and twitch so. Modernist glosses of the character Fu2 (1936,
1233a, 39+4) are based on the fact that this is a protograph for Fu2 (1937, 1233d,
9+7), which meant a prisoner of war, to capture a prisoner, a captive, to catch or
to seize. In other words, the sign in question is embedded in a more complex
character which means a prisoner of war, and the simpler form was the older form
for the prisoner meaning. The position I will take here does not make it necessary
to refute this assumption. It would also be wrong to do so. The character seems
clearly to have had this meaning where it is found on Shang oracle bones, and it
certainly had this meaning on Bronze vessels of known Early Zhou date, where
"the king went to battle and brought back 500 Fu, who submitted." (It is later
known to have changed meaning on Eastern Zhou bronzes, cast after 770 BCE).
This use makes sense in many of the ancient contexts in which the word is used.
But it is emphatically not a logical step to say that because Fu meant X, it could
not possibly have meant Y. This is a particularly fallacious step (bifurcation, false
dichotomy, false dilemma) in a language in which more than half of the characters
are polysemous. The argument means nothing. and yet there are those who will
remain convinced by it. (See Kunst p150-9 for the dissenting opinions on Fu).
Some of the confusion also comes from etymological studies. The graph
depicts either a hand or a bird claw hovering above an egg or a young life form,
such as a child. It is claimed that this depicts a hand seizing a person, a capture.
Yet other etymological speculations might make equal sense: if that claw in the
character was mine, and the child too, I would be telling the predator: "I'll take my
stand here, this is worth defending." It would be a protective gesture, not a
predatory one. Getting the meaning of the word from the pictures is not, and
never has been, an exact science.
And so (partly too for reasons given later) I gloss the term as is traditionally
done, as similar to Xin4 (2738) but less cerebral, or as C heng2 (0381): as trust,
belief, confidence, or to be trustworthy, believable, true, honest, reliable, to inspire
confidence. Fu is also used in this sense in both the Shujing and the Shijing .
These are ancient and legitimate meanings of the character. And this is supported
by most classical Chinese-English dictionaries, for example:
18

Schuessler: to trust, have confidence, verify, to be trusted, sure
Karlgren: confidence, sincere, trust, verify, verification; to hatch
Wieger: to brood on, rely on, confidence
Mathews: brood; confidence, to be sure, trust