sguised as a people, an ad hoc army or a grass-roots militia
07.G, From the Glossary
shi1 (a, the) militia, military, reserves, army, armies, host, hosts, legion(s), troops,
garrison; general, master, specialist, tutor, expert, leader, instructor, director, sage,
assessor, example, (role) model; expertise, organization, preparedness, readiness;
[liquidity]; all; the people, the multitude, population; (to) teach, instruct, emulate,
imitate, take as a norm or standard; model or pattern after another; militarily; unit
of 2500 troops
07.T, Tuan Zhuan
The militia
 (Means) the multitude
Persistence
(Means) uprightness
The skill to employ the multitude (with) uprightness
(Is) especially suited to use by the sovereign
The firm (is) central and resonant
The practice (is) hazardous, yet responsive
To apply this is toxic to all under heaven  and yet the people endure behind it
(For their) welfare:
Given this, where is the error here?
96

07.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.1: united in commitment, persistence is promising)
The militia sets out according to codes
To deny good order is unfortunate
07.1x The militia sets out according to codes:
To forget the codes (is) unfortunate
With a few coded toots on the company’s horn, the militia comes running to rally,
scythes swapped for swords, robes changed for armor. Fitness and readiness both
have been maintained. Each man has his special skill and priorities ready. The tactics
and strategies are by now second nature. Logistics all have their numbers, for faster
communication. The regimens and protocols keep the rhythm and cadence. This is
no free for all: there are orders and chains of command here. Even the martial artists
and warriors, while not pawns, are disciples, instructed to function as one with some
mythical sort of hive mind. With all this enacted by one simple code, it would not do
to let the bugle boy toot his own tune, however rousing and peppy. He has tr ained
to not be himself now. One can only hope that the raiders do not know the music.
07.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 02: Kun, Accepting
(Fan Yao 02.2: straight, square, complete, without repetition)
At the heart of the militia
Promising
Not a mistake
The sovereign three times grants commissions
07.2x At the heart of the militia (is) promise:
Upholding heaven’s favor
* The sovereign three times grants commissions:
Embracing the myriad realms
The general’s tent is pitched in the midst of the hum and he takes the time to listen.
His command radiates from the center instead of the top, and what  respect that he
commands serves him in place of awe. The general is the one who has the broadest
of freedoms, the widest knowledge and the fewest restrictions. And this is why he is
called the general, instead of the specific. The best have a mystical breadth, the least
might lay claim to a heavenly sanction. The general must understand all of the foes.
The one who does nothing else but grease the chariots’ axles needs someone who
connects him with the one who supplies the grease. The specialist will fall in the first
general battle if there is no such coordination. Wise leaders will know how soldiers
behave, follow the way things unfold and shorten the lines of supply and command.
97

07.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 46: Sheng, Advancement
(Fan Yao 46.3: advancing upon an empty town)
A militia likely to transport fatalities
Brutal
07.3x A militia likely to transport fatalities:
Wholly lacking in merit
The militia marches dauntlessly on, but the battle wagons are too full already, with
the casualties and corpses. Of course one expects to see soldiers wounded or dead
in a war, but they have not met the enemy yet. In estimating their strength they don’t
calculate well.  Yes, they can deal out horror and death, but this was the friendly fire.
This is just not passing muster. Perhaps the multitude has taken the leadership over.
Perhaps their leaders are so idle-headed that the masses might as well be self-ruled.
Maybe they can all take a vote now