sneak up behind it with a bridle in hand. Fear is just
information when it’s not allowed to lead. Thunder’s first peal surprises, but novelty
turns into experience. How can a response be worthy of such a stimulus? When the
quality of our echoes inform us of our substance. We learn in time that the things
which collapse have had their life, and the things which move, move into their places.
51.0, Arousal
Fulfillment
Shock brings fear and alarm
And mirthful words and echoing laughter
The thunder startles for a hundred li * around
But do not let drop the ladle of sacred wine
Lizards and tigers alike react to the powerful shocks. But the master of the temple
learns to hear laughter in the storm and affirmation in its thunder. Whatever might
perish has already had its day, and that which has yet to settle is rattled into place.
He learns to look for what thrives here as stable, attuned and ready. Remembering
once having cowered, and how little value this had, today his composure is gained,
not lost to the shock. It’s as though the storm were calling out for heroes or hunters
or warriors. The shock simply washes through him since he has learned to be ready.
Of course he now knows that the thunder follows the flash. The mature one steps up
like an echo, not missing the rhythm, having already owned the experience and made
its energy into his own. The grace and style of the self-possessed is a benefit of the
experience. In the ready state of mind, novelty washes through us, leaving us better
adjusted. The master is alert, not excited; primed, not anxious. He is not disengaged
or neutral. He has one moment, between the stimulus and his response, to make his
choice and convert one kind of arousal into another. He’ll even hear with authority.
359

51.M, Key Words
Stimulus & response, action & reaction, motive & motion; reaction into response
Shake up, provocation; suddenness, surge, raw energy, net motive force, arousal
The unexpected, novelty, surprise, startle reflex; repercussion, resounding, retort
Awakening, quickening, exhilaration, invigoration, challenge, motivation, starting
Mastery, maturity, experience, getting one’s grip, composure, attunement, aplomb
Nimbleness, resilience; hunting, capturing & using ambient energy; taking charge
51.G, From the Glossary
zhen4 (a, the) shock, thunder, shakeup, excitement, arousal, stimulation, force,
power, energy, vibration, movement, motion, quake, terror, awe, unexpected; (to)
shake (up), excite, stimulate, quicken, rouse, arouse, motivate, move, marshal;
inspire, frighten, shock, startle, scare, alarm; tremble, vibrate, lift, quiver, dust off
(s, ed, ing); (to be) shaken, shook up, excited, roused, aroused, stimulated, moved,
motivated, frightened, startled, scared, alarmed; awe inspiring
51.T, Tuan Zhuan
Arousal (means) fulfillment
Shock brings fear (and) alarm:
The fear leads to well-being
Mirthful words (and) echoing laughter:
After there is a precedent
The thunder startles (for) a hundred li (around):
Disturbing the distant and frightening the near
Do not let drop the ladle of sacred wine:
Emerge fit to guard the ancestral shrine,
the altars to place (and) to grain
(And) thereby perform the offerings (with) mastery
360

51.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 16: Yu, Readiness
(Fan Yao 16.1: proclaiming readiness, disappointing)
The shock brings fear and alarm
And later, mirthful words and echoing laughter
Promising
51.1x The shock brings fear (and) alarm:
The fear leads to well-being
* Mirthful words (and) echoing laughter:
After there is a precedent
A reflex reaction, and then an elective response. With the first shock he runs to the
doorway, too close to a mindless fear. This fails to do any good. After the second he
grins and begins to make jokes about his haste. The world did not end: things only
settled a little. We discover ourselves in reactions, and some of us learn from these.
We’re wired to be awakened by the novel and unfamiliar, and we’re often just put to
sleep by what is known. But isn’t i