twice. For those
who do not have this need I
 have annotated the Bibliography a little. I do not
know if the nonsense surrounding the topic is steering many good people away,
but then I tend to assess good people by their ability to cut through nonsense. I
do know that this classic deserves more thorough and serious study than it has
been given and this was more pressing than my own impatience. This ancient,
good natured and venerable old Dragon has for three thousand years given rides
to children, and has even suffered them to paint themselves and their writings
onto its scales. But the winds of time, which are this Dragon’s element, carry a
kind of sand, and short work is usually made of this paint. The more hastily
produced books are products of the hurry and superficiality of this our present
culture, and its horrible translation of value into capitalizing . They are not
expressions of the Yijing’s richer potential and they will pass when this culture
passes. If three millenia can be called any indication, the substance of the Yijing
will endure these changes. But there is a real tragedy here: good mi nds, in
ignoring the surrounding drivel, often ignore the real Yijing as well.
This work is too rarely taught at the college or university level. The few
scholars involved here are too few to make a deep, diverse and vigorous pool of
creative thought. The academic thinking is severely inbred, both in and out of th
e
modernist school. Serious texts on Chinese philosophy seldom begin with the
Zhouyi. When they mention the Yi at all they begin with the Da Zhuan, the Great
Treatise, written many centuries later, and not without its own share of drivel.
The parrots of academia will tell you that, prior to the Da Zhuan, the Yi was no
more than a fortune-telling device, with little to say about who we are in the
11

world around us. It would be very helpful to get some more diversity and
controversy into the universities, to get raptors and corvids into the cage with the
parrots. Then a dialectic might at least mechanically mimic free and independent
thought. I am hoping that this volume, stripped of all but necessary commentary,
will help you to judge this for yourself. My personal inclination is to say that not
only is the Yi humanity’s first book of true, conscious-as-such philosophy (but
less of a tap root of philosophical Daoism than one might think) it is also, and
perhaps more fundamentally, humankind’s first real book of psychology. I say
more fundamentally because a philosophy aims most true when it first fathoms its
own motives. A philosophy which never asks why it would want to see things in
a certain way is subject to some vast and complicated unconscious influences.
And who says a philosophy needs to be metaphysical? Why can it not use
metaphor artfully and be primarily ethical?
The urge to comment on what the original says, which seems to overcome
most authors prior to a ripe and mature grasp of the original, is another fountain of
great confusion. And, to be honest, my own decision to defer the writing of a
commentary for years after doing the translation was a painful one at first: I, too,
had notebooks full of things which must be said. But to stimulate thoughts such
as these is one of the primary purposes of the Yi. To then turn around and present
these derivative thoughts as though they were the Yi is to get the priorities
backwards. Any kind of commentary on the original will, of necessity, consider
no more than a few aspects or layers or facets of a statement which is usually
much broader and deeper in its implications - and this will tend to limit the
implications unnecessarily. The Yi, quite intentionally, was written with many
layers of meaning. If I were to focus my efforts on bringing 
out the humor of a
line I would be likely to miss a more serious layer. Combine this with the fact that
all readers come to the Yi with specific limitations of their own, whether they are
asking a specific question of the Yij