His people are on their feet and thinking, not down on their knees
mouthing platitudes. Yet, in the midst of all of this, whatever demands there may be,
when you meet a mate or a colleague, a mentor or partner to be, the priorities shift
over here and leaves of absence are granted. You might miss one of each sacrifice,*
but you fill voids where helpers should be, consolidate forces, gain recognition and
learn some new tricks. You can’t rejoice thus forever, and outside the world keeps
moving, but few are so important that the spirits can’t go for ten days without them.
55.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 34: Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
(Fan Yao 34.2: persistence is promising)
So abundant are their partition screens
At midday one may see the bushel constellation*
Going ahead brings suspicion and anxiety
To be true and express this
Is timely
55.2x Be true (and) express this:
Credibility helps to manifest the purpose
In prosperous times, tall walls are built, plush curtains hung, bright banners play in
the breezes above. To some it’s as good as it gets. But all this distraction acts like
a maze, the amazements are limits to vision: these amazing distractions do limiting
things to the views. Things cast so many shadows t hat the midday sun is not  seen.
Life is so circumscribed, between the sky-high piles of work to be done, that up and
down, or shortcuts through the curtains, are the only directions some can still take.
These are not liked or trusted. Yet one must climb for broader views, or stay below
chasing cheese. Smart ones run the maze well and wise ones know how to leave if
they must. Common to both is working above suspicion. The others return to their
business, unable to pay much attention. Trust is like having a high-level clearance.
385

55.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 51: Zhen, Arousal
(Fan Yao 51.3: shock awakens, to movement, not distress)
So abundant are their flowing banners
At midday one may see stardust
And break one’s right arm
Make no mistakes
55.3x (So) abundant (are) their flowing banners:
Ill-suited to important concerns
* Breaking one’s right arm:
In the end unfit for use
What once were empty spaces are now filled with life and its houses. The canopy of
progress, and its undergrowth of hustle, casts such a shadow that little above can be
seen now. Bright banners cover most of what’s left of the sky. We wished for this
much to do and all these paths to choose from, but only have time for so much and
still cannot tread more than one path at a time. An abundance of busyness forces the
polarized view. There is something left of the stars above but to stare at these to light
the way out means taking your eyes off the treacherous ground. Too much is afoot:
not much will be carried out. The right arm at risk is not the spare, but the main one.
The lights are useless as lanterns, and not much better as guides. The blind will learn
to hear. If you st ill know which way is up, you will only need one more direction.
55.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua* 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao* 36.4: enter left side, steal dark heart’s intentions)
So abundant are their screens
At midday one may see the bushel constellation
Or find their hidden leader*
Opportune
55.4x (So) abundant (are) their screens:
The position is not appropriate
* (At) midday (one may) see the bushel constellation:
The gloom has no vision
* Finding their hidden leader:
(An) opportunity (for) action
He used to know this place, before things grew so busy. He has spent enough time
here and above to have an old mental map, both a north and an up, and a sense of the
lay of a simpler land. Some of this information can still be carried out in the dark, or
in the darkening cloak of activity. Good pupils will adjust to available light. This lets
him make use of the pall, darkness now thrust upon him, transforming the confusing
experience into more useful intelligence. He keeps to the shadows awhile, looking
behind all the curtains and scenes, learning of the forces at work in the background,
whil