Image, the text
speaks about the winds which move across heaven, or time: winds which carry
the fine grit which either polishes or erodes our little lives in the greater scheme of
things. The remainder of the text, which is itself full of glosses and synonyms,
bears this observation out. The authors seem to be poetically or metaphorically
sketching an observation of a phenomenon of nature, in conjunction with its
corresponding human approaches and a ttitudes, and often comparing the silly
ones to the wise ones. It is in this sense that the Yi may indeed be a lexicon, a
closed language with a finite set of terms, operationally defined, for attitudes or
positions (wei) based upon lessons gleaned from close observation of the way the
world works.
And so I have attempted to use more encompassing terms whose various
meanings and connotations embrace more of the implications of the hexagram as
a whole, much as I have done with the mantic "Janus" words Heng and Zhen. For
example, Gua 08, Bi, I have rendered as Belonging, because the word seems to me
to combine the greatest range of these traditional glosses: to join, put together,
unite, associate, compare, go together with, combine, assemble, accord w ith,
cooperate, sort by class, belong to a class; to be cooperative, concordant, together
with and on behalf of. But where these same words are used in a specific textual
context I have tried to revert to somewhat narrower glosses as appropriate to that
narrower context.
I have seen a number of good arguments made for using the same part of
speech to translate the full set of hexagram names. If the hexagrams are thought
of as situations or entities, maybe nouns would be best; if processes or strategies,
then verbs would be best, or at least ger unds. The only reason that I have not
followed this good advice has been my own inability to apply this consistently
across the whole set. My rule had to be to find the expression most inclusive o
f
the range of traditional meanings, but that optimum seemed to flit from noun to
verb to gerund too often to pin a rule to it.
Logical problems
While a fair percentage of the many conclusions reached by the modernists
appear to be plausible (even to me) the presence of true conclusions does not
imply logical validity in the train of thought which led to them . And conversely,
neither does the application of logically invalid reasoning negate the truth of a
conclusion. To argue that a proposition is false because it has been presented as
the conclusion of a fallacious argument is to commit the logical fallacy known as
argumentum ad logicam, "the fallacy fallacy." There could always exist another
proof or argument that successfully supports the conclusion. W hile I am accusing
the modernists of using faulty logic, and am questioning their methods on t hese
grounds, it is important to be clear up front that I am not trying to refute all of
their conclusions - I am merely trying to undermine the authority of the many
indefensible ones. These methodologies are presented with such unquestioning
acceptance, and the results with such smug authority, that students who have not
carefully honed their critical faculties are easily swept up and along by the errors
29

and run the risk of becoming twitching captives, grunting hamsters and feigning
parrots. My purpose here is to restore the questions and doubts to their rightful
place. Many of the puzzle solutions proposed by modern academic scholars are,
to put it bluntly, one-way dead end streets, from which the scholars cannot return,
owing to pride and to the notion that theses are to be defended instead of tested.
But neither am I arguing that, because my particular approach happens to be
more comprehensive, eclectic and moderate, I must therefore be closer to a final
solution. This would be the "middle ground" fallacy. And I will readily admit to
the fallacy called argumentum ad iudicum, appeal to judgment or common sense.
I have already mentioned hasty genera