unhappy,
in order to make those around them unhappy. This festers awhile, then it makes the
whole situation reject them. This is just like acne or boils: out they pop like pimples.
This is how disease works. It’s becoming an inanimate thing, not owning choices.
254

33.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.5: hunt pheasant, an arrow for praise and office)
Commendable retreat
Persistence is promising
33.5x Commendable retreat’s persistence (is) promising:
By staying true to objectives
Exploratory behavior might try to get close enough to see where mistakes can be
made. It aims to find out exactly where it can go with its freedoms. One expects to
back up, turn around or go sideways when the limits of freedom are reached. One
should not expect perfect foresight when wandering in unexplored realms. And if
you learn that you do n ot belong anymore, you simply retreat, maybe admit some
mistakes and be gracious. If you need to travel lightly, wits are the finest provisions,
not baggage and entanglements. One departs with a rightness of purpose and a long
road ahead, head high, eyes forward, onward to all those new vistas, with letters of
recommendation, nothing severed or otherwise injured, no losses and gains to need
balancing. This is a retreat without  any sense of escape. This is retreating forward.
33.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 31: Xian, Reciprocity
(Fan Yao 31.6: moved in one’s jawbones and tongue)
Resourceful retreat
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
33.6x Resourceful retreat, nothing cannot be turned to advantage:
Having no reason to doubt
Since it seems there is no could-have-been, it seems too that all of the steps to this
present were needed, even if not a part of some silly deity’s plan. And so this path
has come to an end, or at least to one serious change in direction. From the school
which would make you a scholar, the tavern which drove you to drink, or the tyrant
who would have you play soldier, what will you take away with you? What do you
do while on the way out? Do you need the parting words or shots? If this was a path
which has just doubled back on itself, then nothing is over yet and your part is still
in play. The timid retreat going backwards, recounting successes and failures, as if
they had made no decision. The point is not freedom from, but to. And detachment
is from aversion and craving, not from living a life. Opportunities also lie in retreat.
255

33, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 19, Lin, Taking Charge
qian gua (inverse): 34, Da Zhuang, Big and Strong
jiao gua (reverse): 26, Da Chu, Raising Great Beasts
hu gua (nuclear): 44, Gou, Dissipation
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Sovereign Gua, 6th Moon (Jul)
33, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chesed in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Four of Swords
* Astrology: Jupiter in Air
33, Quotations
* A man is rich in proportion to the number of things he can afford to let alone.
—Thoreau
* Despising, for you, the city, thus I turn my back: there is a world elsewhere.
—Shakespeare, Coriolanus
* Men of great wisdom, looking at things far off or near at hand, do not think
them insignificant for being small nor unwieldy for being great. —Zhuangzi
* They who apply themselves too closely to little things often become incapable
of great things. —Francois de la Rochefoucald
* What better faith can a man have than to refuse to die for the things he believes
in? —Kenneth Patchen
* A feeling for the faraway is at the same time one for history. At a distance space
becomes time and the horizon means the future. —Spengler
* Il faut reculer pour mieux sauter. —Montaigne
* If you are near the enemy, make him believe you are far from him. If you are far
from the enemy, make him believe you are near. —Sunzi, The Art of War
256

GUA 34, DA4 ZHUANG4, BIG AND STRONG
 
  Binary 111 100 = 60; Qian below, Zhen above
34.X, Overall Image
Thunder in the sky above
Big and strong
The noble young one, accordingly, outside of respect,
will not take a step
Great vigor, on top of great strength. With the pur