hat the reader can never truly be certain
39

whether the meaning taken from a text will correspond precisely to the author's
intent, but this lack of certainty is not a reason to never try. It is not a proof that
we cannot get very close, even close enough , to the intended meanings.
The Higher Criteria of Sense
Much of the human predicament is not unlike belly-crawling through a
maze with walls only one meter high. The mouse who gets up on the m aze wall
may be cheating according to the lab attendant's rules, but at least he has a better
grasp of the creative process. Problems do not need to be solved on the level at
which they were first posed or created. Solutions are much easier if you can add a
little overview. Ironically, in a discipline in which context criticism plays such an
important part, the broader notion of context, so fundamental and indispensible to
the Chinese language, is the dimension most glaringly absent. As stated before,
many of the literal translations generated out  of the modernists' narrow glossaries
often make very little sense at all, even to one with some study of what we know
of the cultural context. Not being one of these scholars, I was able to take this
lack of sense as a clue that maybe there were some flaws in the methods being
used. I have no need to argue that words which now seem too narrow for this
context do not belong in a Yijing glossary, or that they do not belong among the
optional selections in the translation process. They do. But to take these limited
sets of meanings as the terra firma  on which to erect an edifice is fraught with
problems, one of the biggest being that there is no higher order template with
which to measure their success. What is needed is a test of validity on the next
level above the one where the propositional knowledge and si ngular facts are
handled, some method of verifying, adjusting or correcting the results of t hese
methods, of examining the translation according to a somewhat larger picture, of
referring the words back into the context in which they sit. If we do not do this
there is really nothing with which to check the accuracy of the 
findings, no
reference back to anything. Without a feedback loop it is no wonder the process
has run amok one detail at a time. The use of context cannot be separated out
from anything written in Chinese. It is not foreign to the process - in fact it
constitutes the bulk of Chinese grammar, and is often the only clue to the
meaning of a text.
To me this implies establishing a working hypothesis, setting up a criterion
against which to measure results. For me the assumption to make is this: The text
of the Zhouyi is meaningful and was intended by its authors to provide some form
of useful information. Further, the text hangs together as a whole, metaphors with
mantic formulae and all. In the areas where the modernist scholars have
inadvertently let some sophisticated thinking slip through their editing process,
the Zhouyi already betrays thought pr ocesses too deep and developed to be
captivated by "omen or 'peasant interpretation' texts" about ripping rats, bunched
fat meats and gullied dragons. My goal is to understand the text as it may have
been intended to be understood. This is of course complicated by the fact that it
was intended to be understood on many different levels and in an enormous
range of contexts, and also by the fact that "texts are suggestive rather than
40

explanatory of meanings" (Tung p16). And sometimes the text is actually too
plain and simple, 01.0 being a good example. In a way this approach is aesthetic.
As expressed by Buckminster Fuller, "When I am working on a problem, I never
think about beauty, but when I have finished, if the solution is not beautiful, I
know it is wrong". In a way this test is like looking for fitness, in the proper way
to understand the term, as fitting the facts, as being worthy of survival beyond
the life expectancy of the academic fads and fancies.
Applying t