n could stand as an argument for the early existence of the two
graphically distinct whole and broken lines depicting the Gua as an image, but it does not
follow that this implies any binary cosmology or Yin-Yang theory later associated with the
pair. This may only have been a simple graphic device.
None of these examples rely upon an assumption that the Zhouyi authors were
using Tri grams as a more fundamental element. However, the use of both words and
metaphors in the Chong Gua  (Repeated Trigrams, Fig. 23) contradicts the theory that the
Trigrams were not in use or on the minds of the Zhouyi authors. Too much of the
construction of the Gua C i and Yao C i texts can be explained by assuming the use of
smaller, more elemental forms. Gua 52 is l ike a multiple mountain range, resembling a
spine. Gua 29 uses Xi (Repeated) in the Gua Ming at 29.0 and 29.1, and reiteratives at 29.3.
Gua 51 uses reiteratives at 51.0, 51.1, 51.3 & 51.6. Yao C i 01.3 reiterates its own Gua
Ming. Many of the Chong G ua use dichotomies such as going and coming (wang l ai),
advance and retreat (jin tui) and before and after ( xian ho
u) to point to the duplication of
Trigram forms. The use of ru and ruo (like, as if) at Yao C i 30.4 and 30.5, to indicate
discrepancy between the real and the perceived, suggests the reflected images. But it was not
until later that this dimension was fully developed, in the Wings’ Tuan Zhuan and in the Da
Xiang.
The above opens the door to Ba Gua Xiang (Trigram Images) which combine a
pair of Trigram elements into a Natural image. The clearest of these are Sun over Earth at
Gua 35 and Sun under Earth at Gua 36; the position of Heaven in relation to Earth at Gua
11 & 12; and the position of Fire in relation to Water at Gua 63 & 64. Once again, too
much of the Zhouyi’s construction is explained by the assumption of an early development
of Trigram Images. Remember too that the Zhouyi editors may have gone to some lengths
to conceal many of the text’s structural complexities. And they left the book without an
introduction.
Gua Symmetry appears to have played a part in the explanation of the eight Gua
which have this property (see Fig. 16), especially in the 
Pang Tong Gua (Opposite Pairs)
61 & 62 and 27 & 28, the half of the Symmetrical Gua which are not also Chong Gua. The
Dominance or Balance of Rou and Gang Lines (see Figs. 11, 12 & 28) colored some
interpretations, especially among the twelve cases where one type would dominate the other
by five-to-one (see Fig. 12) or the two types would alternate perfectly (Gua 63 & 64). The
Clustering or Clumping of Lines was also a factor, especially where three or more lines
were grouped together, e.g. at Gua pairs 31 & 32 and 41 & 42, in addition to those
mentioned above in other contexts (see Figs. 11 & 12).
21

The Ban Xiang or Half-Images
Analysis of the Hexagram both in terms of its constituent Trigrams and in terms of
the meanings assigned to the Places occupied by these Trigrams began prior to the Wings.
These dimensions are mentioned in the Zuozhuan (and maybe even in the Shujing as Zhen
and Hui) and, as suggested earlier, there are ample reasons to suspect that they were at least
incipient in the Zhouyi. The meanings and symbolic assignments of the Ba Gua themselves
have already been scoped in the Xiao Gua. The Ban Xiang or the Half-Image dimension
concerns the meanings assigned to the Lower and Upper Places which the Trigrams occupy
in the Hexagram. By extension, this dimension also refers to the Two Places occupied by
Rou or Gang Lines in the Si Xiang, the Four Emblems. It may be best to use the term Liang
(3953) Wei or Two Positions to distinguish this dimension from Er W ei, the Second
Changing Line Place in the Hexagram. Related or corollary to the Liang W ei is a less
developed set of meanings and assignments for the two places occupied by the Hu Ti , the
Nuclear, Overlapping or Interwoven Trigrams.
The Ban Xiang dimension is the basis of the 3rd and 4th Wings’ Da Xi