has a difficult
education ahead. He is given the horse whose spirit will not be broken. The swords
that he trains with are real. The books he studies have depth. Whatever part he plays,
he plays hard and well to sharpen his skills. He also loses those forms of behavior
which will not lead him to excellence, and this means a lot of normal human activity.
When the time comes to break free from his practice, into a world not bound by his
theories or gates, his sharp skil ls and quick senses will be ready to take advantage
of any situation, including defense and retreat. And he might even use these skills
in loving, or cooking a meal. Although he is young, this training is an investment
in the children of his children. His high exp ectations will serve the higher purpose.
26.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.4: this is not one’s own domain, no blame)
A young bull’s corral
Most promising
26.4x Six fourth (is) most fortunate:
To (still) have well-being
The young bull comes of age. His horns start to bud and he starts to get new ideas
of turf, and redefining the peace. While his horns are his right by birth, a big world
around him will lay claim to its rights as well. The husbandman has his own plans
and notion of property rights, and insists on a lot of control. In the course of growth
of every new power, however great it is set to become, there are places where destiny
may be forestalled or cheated entirely, a time when a force may be tamed or coopted.
This is no secret to rich and powerful clans: its regular use has kept them in power.
The way to win here is to be the one who controls or restrains his own ambitions, or
makes them seem shared with those of the powers that be. To roam one’s own pen,
and service all of those cows, isn’t leading a wild herd: but it’s also not being an it.
212

26.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 09: Xiao Chu, Raising Small Beasts
(Fan Yao 09.5: being true like bond, wealth uses neighbors)
A gelded boar’s tusks
Promising
26.5x Six fifth has promise:
There will (still) be rewards
Here is a small and clean solution to a large and dirty problem. Now the tusks once
bared in a menacing snarl have a hint of the saint in their gl eam, and the world has
just become perfect. Although he’s still kept confined, it’s only against his playful
leaps into the lap of his master. He’s allowed to keep some of his nature. He’ll have
more friends this way too. He gets to be part of a team. He’s guaranteed the serenity
to accept what he cannot change. Culture is a veneer no longer over this wild beast.
It now goes all the way down, only not quite as far. Good fortune for the one with
the knife, for knowing it takes but a nip at the root of unruly behavior, a little effort
to get great results. And this is a thing we have handed down, after losing so many
great warriors and hunters to boars. Our hunting party includes those gone before.
26.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 11: Tai, Interplay
(Fan Yao 11.6: city wall falls back into moat, explain orders)
What is heaven’s thoroughfare?
Fulfillment
26.6x What is heaven’s course?
The way the great advance
Is this a highway to heaven or what? The young heir inherits the high, sacred place,
the shining mountain, held so much in awe by the mound builders. Who can forget
the whole point of building these mounds: to gain a commanding view from above?
To honor the wonderful height, he restores the ancestral shrine and sets a great feast
for the stars, and nobles and worthies too. All heaven attends his fine service, and the
stars have a marvelous time, although they eat little or nothing. When you set a table
for gods you get to eat the leftovers, so plenty remains for those not dining at home,
and for guests from across the great waters. Is the top of this heap as close as we’ll
get to heaven? Was the fine time worth  saving up for? What does a peak experience
justify? Fulfilling ourselves or our duties, fulfillment is freedom: it lets us move on.
213

26, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite):