d his axe. The symptoms are the same,
but the disorder is entirely different: different kind of spirits this time, spiriting his
stuff away. As Xun4 doubled, this is the 
"thinking twice" Hexagram. Here of all
places it is not wise to generalize from single instances and go back to sleep on
your bed of complacency. Quick generalizations are most ill-suited to the shape-
shifting world of the Gua Xun. Here again is a line of the type which plays with
the tendency to lose sight of the subject matter of the Gua as a whole, or to not
relate one line to what is happening in the others.
557

A Yijing Bibliography
The following entries each contributed in some way to the research for this
work. The entries highlighted in bold were the most useful or were sources for
important new ideas. A few of the Modernist scholars have been included in this
category for the detail of their scholarship and the number of interesting windows
they have opened onto old problems, but this does not constitute an endorsement
of their translations. Other entries may be noted for their strengths or weaknesses.
Articles and academic papers are not rated. Some newer books are listed in the
“Short List” at the end. See also Links on the website.
Acknowledgements:  Much thanks and gratitude to those who have given
me valued feedback, constructive criticism and encouragement (even for the
advice I was too stubborn to take) and especially to Hilary Barrett, Pedro Batista,
Raul G’Acha, Angel Herrero, LiSe Heyboer, Denis Ma ir, Steve M arshall, Fred
Neeser, Lorraine Patsco, Mondo Secter, and the late Larry (Mo4) Moore.
Adler, Joseph A., trans; written by Zhuxi Introduction to the Study of the Classic
of Change (I-hsüeh ch'i-meng). NY: Global Scholarly Publications, 2002.
Albertson, Edward. The Complete I Ching for the Millions . Los Angeles, CA:
Sherbourne Press, 1969.
Anthony, Carol K. A Guide to the I Ching . Stow, MA: Anthony Publishing Co.,
1980. Revised and Enlarged 1988.
_____The Philosophy of the I Ching . Stow, MA: Anthony Publishing Co., 1981.
Arcarti, Kristyna. I Ching for Beginners. Great Britain: Hodder & Stoughton,
1994.
Baggot, Andy. Teach Yourself I Ching . Chicago, IL: NTC/Contemporary Pub.,
1999.
Balkin, Jack M. The Laws of Change: I Ching and the Philosophy of Life . NY:
Schocken Books, 2002.
Benjamin, William James. "System I Ching: Being an Essay on the Constitution
and Compositon of the Book of Changes." Wondo Publications, 1974.
Birdwhistell, Anne D. Transition to Neo-Confucianism: Shao Yung on
Knowledge and Symbols of Reality . Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 1989.
Blofeld, John. I Ching, The Book of Change. NY: E.P. Dutton & Sons, 1965.
_____I Ching - O Livro das Transmutacoes . Tr. Ronaldo Sergio de Biasi. Rio
de Jaineiro, BR: Nova Era, 1996.
Bonnershaw, Asa. I Ching, The Book of Changes . Santa Barbara, CA: Bandanna
Books, 1986.
Brennan, J.H. The Magical I Ching. St Paul, MN: Llewellyn Pub., 2000.
Britto, Ely. I Ching: Um Novo Ponto De Vista. Sao Paulo: Editora Cultrix, 1994.
Bullock, Raymond R. Guide to I Ching . London: Caxton Editions, 2000.
559

Cammann, Schuyler. "Some Early Chinese Symbols of Duality." History of
Religions. 24:3 (1985): 215-254. Hetu & Loshu evolution.
_____"The Eight Trigrams: Variants and Their Uses." History of Religions.
29:4 (1990): 301-17.
Carus, Paul. Chinese Astrology: Early Chinese Occultism . LaSalle, IL: Open
Court, 1974.
Chan Chiu Ming. Book of Changes: An Interpretation for the Modern Age .
Singapore: Asiapac, 1997.
Chu, W.K. and W.A. Sherrill. The Astrology of I Ching. London: Arkana, 1976.
Chung, Chang-Soo. I Ching on Man and Society: An Exploration into Its
Theoretical Implications in Social Sciences . NY: University Press of
America, 2001.
Chung Wu. The Essentials of the Yi Jing: Translated, Annotated, and With an
Introduction and Notes.  St. Paul, MN: Paragon House, 2003.
Cleary, Thomas. The Taoist I Ching. Boston: Shambhala, 1986. Translation of
commentary by Liu I-ming, 1796.
_____The Bu