means something entirely different from a more usual translation of
"weighing things and making them equal." This "handicapping" would actually be
to appraise things falsely.
* 15.5 It was interstate propriety, if not unwritten law, to offer emergency relief to
neighboring states in times of crisis. This refers to a neighboring state refusing to
do so, probably looking for political advantage in the neighbor’s misfortune.
15, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Chesed in Assiah
* Tarot: Four of Pentacles
* Astrology: Jupiter in Earth
15, Quotations
* My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;
Coral is far more red than her lips’ red ...
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground ...
—Shakespeare, Sonnet #130
* But if you could hide the world in the world, so that there was nowhere it could
be removed, this would be the grand reality of the ever-enduring thing.
—Zhuangzi
* Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem. —William of Occam
(Entities are not to be multiplied beyond necessity, a.k.a. Occam’s Razor)
* We refuse praise from a desire to be praised twice. —La Rochefoucauld
* Great men are true men, the men in whom nature has succeeded. They are not
extraordinary - they are in the true order. It is the other species of men who are
not what they ought to be. —Henri-Frederic Amiel
148

GUA 16, YU4, READINESS
 
 Binary 000 100 = 04; Kun below, Zhen above
16.X, Overall Image
Thunder comes from the earth with energy
Readiness
The early sovereigns, accordingly,
composed music to celebrate merit
Enthusiastically offering this to the highest divinity*
Earth stirs, awakens, speaks out. The young sprout breaks free, lives out its homage
to ancestors, simply, by carrying on. The fetus begins first to learn of its world by
kicking the walls of the womb. The feedforward gives feedback meaning. Existence
presses forward and outward before it develops ideas, out of balance in forward and
outward directions, living, then learning, then learning to learn, and finally learning to
live. The humming beings gathered, to set forth their first kings, to conduct their new
music. They sang songs of praise and gratitude, inviting their gods and ancestors,
their futures and pasts, to be present, carrying on all night and getting carried away.
16.0, Readiness
Worthwhile to establish delegates and mobilize the reserves
Masses in general, whether made up of people or stones, can seem very stubborn
about getting carried away. But sometimes all this wants is a lead, or something to
break down resistance. And then, when they go, they go wholly, with great inertia
and power. Displace the right rock at the foot of the slope and the whole hill goes
for a run. Just as matter and water are always ready to settle, or move down the hill,
life is always ready to get up and go, to rise up and be more than it was. Any excuse
for a party might do: life is a proactive force, and will turn procreative every chance
it can take. Readiness is half of luck and wants only an opportunity. As an old force,
much older than brains, it is sometimes hard to ensure that enthusiasms be always
measured and rational. Energy joined with acceptance, movement made welcome,
is power. But when a host is so moved it will want a tune and a beat to move to, and
so human hosts want conductors and some lofty excuse for their being so inspired.
The parts of a self are also a host. They too get elated when all of them go the same
way, life affirmed, spirits high, the heart thumping cadence. But who will ask where?
149

16.M, Key Words
Enthusiasm, eagerness, exuberance, willingness, zest, the joyful noise, inspiration
Spontaneity, attunement, rhythms, consonance, synchrony; an optimum readiness
Acting in a timely fashion; responsive movement; prepare, provide for, allow for
Forwardness, predisposition, inclination, initiative, earnestness, encouragement
Confidence, preparedness,