rs. Individuals faring well make up the family welfare.
Families faring well make up the general welfare. This does not begin with a king
and flow downwards. All that a leader needs do here is to stand well out of the way
and declare the right of a family to earn, not be given, a living. This will set some
better examples. Dominion means being completely at home, and this is where it
is learned. When wherewithal has been well-received or well-taken, it will find its
way back around. A king should not even tax this: he should tax unwanted things.
278

37.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.5: dressed up in hills and gardens, shabby gift)
When the sovereign draws near to his family
Do not be concerned about luck
37.5x The sovereign draws near to his family:
Sharing mutual affection
The king and his royal family are closely observed by all of their broader relations.
Of course the gossips are busy, sniffing around for signs to mistrust, trying to pry
and peer through the royal pomp. No, they do not have lives of their own, but yes,
in a sense they should do this. Just as the king should put on his royal appearance.
But the critic should also look for love and warmth, and the king should show off
some of his nobler substance. The paternal and maternal forces at home will reflect
in the patterns in matters of state. The cold winds of tyranny often begin on a cold
hearth at home, where restrictions stand in for boundaries, or rules and laws for clear
explanations and authority for the force of a healthy character. Society finds its first
inspirations here and models itself accordingly. In a microcosm it’s easily studied.
37.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.6: soaking one’s head, serious)
Being true is as good as impressive
The outcome is just as promising
37.6x Rather than being impressive, keep the promise
Coming back to one’s own individual style
Father is first to admit it: he has as much growing to do as the wife and the kids.
His place is something he earns. Authority authors its own life first. Life is an old
enough process to know how to govern itself. A good work commands with more
depth than coercion and the only compulsion t hat works well is that of compelling
example. Motivation which only negates learns little about our reasons for moving.
Superior authority works on the substance beneath it and relies not so much on its
orders of who can peck whom. More evolved systems exist than those developed
by chickens, but they also require more courage. True authority learns to respect
before it asks for respect in turn, so that candor and frankness are signs of respect.
Being familiar is a good thing, not unimpressive. Unimpressive is not being true.
279

37, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 40, Jie, Release
qian gua (inverse): 38, Kui, Estrangement
jiao gua (reverse): 50, Ding, The Cauldron
hu gua (nuclear): 64, Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 47, 06, 58, 10
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
37, Notes
* 37.1 There was a boundary to us then, when we was on the land.
—John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath
37, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Lamed; Path between Netzach and Tipareth (Trad: Tp-Gb)
* Tarot: Justice (Living together)
* Astrology: Seventh House, Cardinal Air, Libra
37, Quotations
* Give and give until you wave goodbye. —Niakan maxim
* One hour’s teaching is better than a whole night of prayer. —Mohammed
* A teacher affects eternity; he can never tell where his influence stops.
—Henry Adams
* Man’s sense of himself as separate from and opposed to the universe is a
bar to his conducting its currents. It insulates him. —A. Crowley, Magick
* The hand that rocks the cradle is the hand that rules the world.
—William Ross Wallace
* Home is heaven for beginners. —Charles H. Parkhurst
* Place the work of a wife and mother on the same footing as other work; that is,
on the footing of labor worth its hire. —G. B. Shaw
* The greatest thing a father can do for his children i