ngry Mouth
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
61, Notes
* 61.0 Many interpretations of this phrase are based on unquestioned assumptions
by some commentators that both pigs and fishes are stupid. But the authors of the
Yi were keener observers of life than this. Pigs, in particular, are quite intelligent.
And the word tun2 actually refers to suckling pigs, or piglets. My suspicion that
“piglets and fishes” was a phrase which meant “sons and daughters” might be a
reach, but it is based on separate, well-known associations of piglets with sons and
fishes with daughters.
61, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yetzirah of Briah
* Tarot: Prince of Cups
* Astrology: Scorpio Ascending, Fixed Water
61, Quotations
* Truth has not such an urgent air. —Boileau
* Everything is arranged in such a fashion that the worst of all tastes, the taste for
the absolute, is cruelly teased and abused until finally man learns to incorporate
some art into his feelings, and to prefer, if necessary, to experiment with artificiality.
—Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil
* It is good to express a matter in two ways simultaneously so as to give it both a
right foot and a left. Truth can stand on one leg to be sure, but with two it can
walk and get about. —Nietzsche
* If the cultivation of the understanding consists in one thing more than another,
it is surely in learning the grounds of one’s own opinions. —J. S. Mill
* The whole truth is native in you. —Meister Eckhart
* The eye wherein I see the Divine is the same eye wherein the Divine sees me.
My eye and Divinity’s eye are one eye, one vision, one knowing, one love.
—Meister Eckhart
* Everything without tells the individual that he is nothing; everything within
persuades him that he is everything. —X. Doudan
424

GUA 62, XIAO3 GUO4, SMALLNESS IN EXCESS
 
  Binary 001 100 = 12; Gen below, Zhen above
62.X, Overall Image
Over the mountain there is thunder
Smallness in excess
The noble young one, accordingly,
in conduct will exceed in respect
In loss will exceed in sorrow
In practice will exceed in economy
Thunder out of the mountain. Whether this rumbling reminder has come from the
climate or gravity, whether it settles or unsettles the mountain, the animals vanish,
birds take flight, the insects are two thirds antennae. The ones who play this safely
are favored to keep on playing. By adopting their postures according to the threat,
by hiding deep in their niches, or whatever else it may take, and some extra just for
good measure, small things add up to security, with margins of safety larger than
margins for error. It’s an anticlimactic part of ambition that to seek greater worlds
will shrink us; it’s an irony of soaring so high that success is found in the landing.
62.0, Smallness in Excess
Fulfillment
Worthwhile to persist
Appropriate for minor concerns,
Not suited to great concerns
The flying bird bequeaths this message:
If not adapted to heights, adapt to remaining below
Much promise
It might seem a little bit odd to hear the high-flying bird praised for a groundedness
in its attitude. But birds do not conquer skies, and men do not conquer mountains.
Once the mountain’s peak has been gained, the rest of the trail goes down, unless
we want to leap from the cliffs with some delusion of grandeur. The potential energy
so hard fought for and won here is only a loan, and must be returned as long as our
nests and homes are below. In proportion to the numbers a form of life breeds, the
long-term odds of survival oppose it. What looks l ike success should be humbling.
Nature, of course, knows no fury or wrath. Natural law has its own kind of justice.
For those who have gone too far, its enforcement must be thought of as voluntary.
Survival will favor the humble. What squeaks will continue to squeak, what draws
too much attention only gets hunted down. High-flying birds have their limits too:
that steady force which brings them back home binds heaven’s behavior as well.
The stars themselves obey this, a company noble enough t