the
sovereign's will as the sorcerer is wont to be. I will also use the term Wu Xian ,
shamanic congress, gathering or collective, to name their guild, which I am
inclined to view as something akin to a think tank
If there was ever a sub-culture that you do not want to take the exoteric or
popular point of view with, it would be these Wu S hi. If there was ever a case
where we need to first understand author intent esoterically it would be with the
Wu Xian. Yes, there are large schools of thought which advise explicitly to look
only at the words of the text, as they are commonly understood, and advise
against looking for the author's intent and introducing thereby the slippery slope
element of subjectivity. U nfortunately this nobler and more rigorous approach
has been a dismal failure. I would have to compare taking the popular view here
to doing the research for a thesis on Nietzsche by taking an opinion poll among
German Lutherans. As anyone who has ever been more than s uperficially
involved in the mystic arts, hermeticism or the noetic sciences should know
36

painfully well, there is a huge difference in  perspective between being outside
looking in and being inside looking out. Ask anyone who is not a witch what
witchcraft is about: It's about magical powers and getting what you want from
the Devil. Ask a real witch and you might hear: it's simply about finding the right
mix of empowerment and gratitude. Or take the lowly toad, whose skin did
indeed get put into the witch's brew. Here the popular ideas get quite a bit more
bizarre than the occultists understanding: the magical toad confers wisdom
through the jewel in his forehead, you have to k iss the frog to turn him into a
prince (it just had to be changed to a frog when kissing got involved), and in
ancient China, the Wan Nian Hama, the ten thousand year toad, held the occult
secret to living forever. But from the shaman's somewhat less superstitious
perspective, the venom of certain toads is carefully prepared to make palatable a
powerful entheogen, one which confers wisdom and can expand one's "time
horizons" to ten-thousand year perspectives. There is a similar choice of points of
view with the Zhouyi - you can take the exoteric or popular point of view and
make the whole thing look really ignorant and supe rstitious, as the modernists
have done, or you can attempt to take the point of view of the authors and try
instead to understand what was really being said by some of the more learned,
creative and articulate people of the day.
I have had the good fortune in this lifetime to count a few primitive tribal
shamans among my friends (real ones, not the expensive, new-age variety). These
people lived in more primitive societies than the Zhouyi court. But for all of
 their
lack of cultural sophistication, I have found them to be neither superstitious nor
slow-witted. The villagers nearby, the missionaries and the anthropologists were
another story entirely. The shamans did not foam at the mouth or flop around on
the floor - in fact they were rather articulate. Up close and personal they are a lot
more rational than you might expect. I even had a chance to share passages from
Laozi, Zhuangzi and even Nietzsche with two of them and they laughed at all the
right moments. Above all, they were quite adept at counseling their people,
helping them with their anxieties about life and its many kinds of Changes, which
I suspect to be the function of the Yi and the primary intent of its authors. So I am
not surprised at all to find penetrating psychological insights in the Zhouyi, even
where the complexity of the metaphors is culturally limited. It is much easier for
me to see one of these than to see a superstitious peasant omen int erpretation.
The role of this person in almost every human culture at any stage of its
development across the ages is that of a counselor. Modern counselors are simply
filling in an ancient function. It is not the shaman's world view that is deriv