ave confidence, verify, to be trusted, sure
Karlgren: confidence, sincere, trust, verify, verification; to hatch
Wieger: to brood on, rely on, confidence
Mathews: brood; confidence, to be sure, trust in, have confidence in
Anachronisms and the Evolution of Concepts
I cannot fault the commitment or attempt of the context critics to remain
principled in their avoidance of anachronisms (at least the retroactive kind). The
most flagrant violations of this principle in the contemporary English texts occur
in the retroactive application of terminology from the Wings to the Zhouyi. In
most cases a term which is important to the Zhouyi as a whole will be used
frequently enough throughout the text to scope out the range of its meanings by
summing its most plausible translations. But this requires studying the book you
are trying to translate, and this is off limits to the scholars. This is what I have tried
to accomplish in the Glossary: to scope a satisfactory field of possible meanings
for a character in order to suggest that this field might have at least an implied
center or a cluster of meanings all germane to the character. Please note that in
the Glossary many of meanings supplied for each term are not limited to a single
period or level of culture but are drawn from the broader history of the language
through the Han. I have attempted to prevent this from bleeding into the
translations, however. Is it valid to try to understand an earlier form of a word by
studying its later evolution? It is valid to try, but not to be certain beyond the
level of hypothesis. The pudding must be edible. Unfortunately, this is a f uzzy
method with fuzzy edges, demanding fuzzy logic - it is social science, not a
physical science. It is only in the Matrix text where I have narrowed these down
to what I suspect to be Early Zhou glosses and implications. If
 we insist on
unassailable knowledge of the meanings the Chinese terms had at the time of the
writing of the original text this translation will only offer suggestions. But at least
it will make sense.
The language and vocabulary of a beloved and well-read classic will have
a stabilizing effect on the language itself. Words in the cla ssics will tend towards
the preservation of their original meanings, at least among their optional uses. This
is a phenomenon which should be well known to us: there are many dozens of
English words alive today in their original meanings for no other reason than that
William Shakespeare used (or coined) them. Such a stabilizing effect is every bit
as powerful as that of a dictionary. [Although the Chinese have had these for
nearly two millenia, a third would have been most helpful]. Given this effect on a
word's continuity and stability, there is simply no reason to assume that a word
meaning which is verifiable only in later literature was probably not a meaning in
common use much earlier. There are important and well-known exceptions to this,
however, discussed below. W hile these doubts do not bode well for the certain
durability and perfection of the edifice which the scholars are now aspiring to
build, the authors of the Yi might well answer that the truly durable edifice is not
at all like a tower anyway, but rather like a tree: a seed-bearing tree which renews
itself by its propagation through time.
19

Still on the subject of anachronisms, the question arises of where to draw
the line when the often oracular and insightful authors of the Yi perceived the
need for a name for an idea before the idea had been named. If I am trying to
express a new idea, or at least one I have not seen set down before, I am likely to
use several of the closest words I can find and use them from slightly unfamiliar
angles. In the process, if I am understood and the idea has m erit, the envelopes of
meaning for these words will be stretched a little, and the dictionary might one
day add this to the definition. But how can you tell which glosses specifically
occurred to the authors?