haracterize the
inclinations of the myriad beings” (xc II.2). This myth is the sole basis of claims
that the Yijing is five thousand years old. But it also illustrates a religious practice
which was to complicate the lives of historical scholars until late in the Western
Han dynasty. This practice was ancestor worship. In the service of a truly great or
meritorious ancestor, who became something like a deity, who could help with
both weather and destiny, the good heir offered up his or her best as a sacrifice.
In the case of the Book of Changes , this best was credit for the original thought,
as well as the creation itself. This practice hearkens back to the original meanings
of our words sacrifice and dedication . No work in the tradition of the Changes
was signed by a mere heir until Zuo’s Commentaries, the Zuozhuan, in the mid
4th century 
BCE. All “history” before this time is little more than forensics and
divination record.
Following the Legendary Period came the Xia Culture (possibly a dynasty),
which, at current best guess, spanned from 1994 to 1523. Our knowledge of this
era is meager, and comes from archaeology and stories which at least seem to be
more semi-legendary than mythical. Animals had been domesticated, fields were
irrigated, land was reclaimed. Millet and wheat were cultivated. Bronze was used
in weaponry, chariots in war. Written symbols were developed.
Next came the Shang dynasty, 1523 to 1027 (the last 273 years of this are
later called the Yin dynasty) as dated (if only for a convenient benchmark) by the
recently discovered Bamboo A nnals. This dating is still controversial. This is the
first dynasty from which we have written records, thanks largely to this era's
developing divinatory tr adition. Society was growing more complex, but its hub
was still agriculture. Sorghum, barley and rice were cultivated, in addition to millet
and wheat. Horses pulled wagons and chariots, but were not yet widely ridden.
The sovereign was known as the Son of Heaven. A modest bureaucracy helped
the nobles to run the state. Definition grew sharper between the social classes
and between divisions of labor. B oth the ancestors and nature deities were
worshipped. Human beings were sacrificed, sometimes in large numbers. And
sometimes the sacrifice was a diviner who had made a serious error. The calendar
488

was developed and symbols evolved into written language, with thousands of
characters taking form. Bronze casting became a fine art.
Archaeological discoveries in our own  nineteenth and twentieth centuries
bear concrete witness to the long-rumored tradition of divination in ancient
China, and this antedates the earliest reliable mention of the Book o f Changes
by many centuries. The unearthing of more than a hundred thousand Oracle or
Dragon Bones dating from the Shang more than suggests a lively tradition, and
the sophistication of both the written characters found on these pieces and of the
practice of divining itself hints that we may yet make discoveries reaching even
further back. These pieces of history are still far from fully assembled, but we now
know a few things m ore. The Spirits were consulted on a wide range of topics,
including marriage, childbirth, weather, illness, agriculture, politi cal alliances,
border crossings, military aggression, hunting expeditions, settlement locations,
loyalty of service, official appointments, speculative investment, enforcement of
law, dreams, toothaches and personal problems of mental stability. The Spirits
could not only tell what was likely to happen: they could also assist in bringing
about a more promising outcome, if such support was m erited, here largely by
one’s sacrifices.
Divination was done carefully, not casually, and the process took some time.
An initial mark or hole was made on a scapula (scapulimancy) or the plastron of a
turtle or tortoise shell (plastromancy). The question was formulated and engraved
on the piece, which was then heated until cracks appea