raw stuff comes together, to converge in expected results, the higher
purpose and principles to which these changes are offered. The wise are attempting
to create a higher culture, by nourishing health and excellence, nobility and an ethic.
The shamans, with potions and medicines, create the changes in their altered states.
Knowledge as science applied must regard the present, but this will serve a purpose.
50.0, The Cauldron
The most promising offering
The sovereign would rather rule a more highly developed culture. To this end, he can
use his position, and what he knows about science, to nourish and bring out the best
that is in his people. The sage tends the flame and the cauldron to secure the success
of the offering. The formula that early alchemists looked for was at work beneath
their crucibles the whole time they sought it above. They merely needed to make the
analogy live, to apply it in broader ways.  For the chef, as well, who would nourish
humanity’s promise: the first things he needs are fuel, a good draft of air and some
sparks. And next, a place dedicated to change, raw spicy stuff and good appetites.
The alchemy serves higher purpose and powers, the leadenness of our being turns
into gold, into a life to which we give value; the belly turns food into light, a stew is
transformed to serenity, courage and wisdom. Delightful aromas entice the spirits to
help us. So what is sacrificed here, besides a few logs, and these basic ingredients,
submitted for transformation? To sacrifice does not mean to lose things: it means to
make them sacred. Thus the past is made sacred here, redeemed for a higher value.
353

50.M, Key Words
Crucible, tripod, a sacrificial cooking vessel; consecrated or dedicated offerings
Dedicated change, change by design, science as art; applied heat and knowledge
Refinement, sublimation, purification, alchemy, the great work of transformation
Symbol of dynastic foundation & creative power; nourishment of ability, nobility
Pragmatic utility, specific utility; excellence by design, instrumentality, formulae
Realizing potential in raw material, social engineering, creation of higher cu lture
50.G, From the Glossary
ding3 (a, the) cauldron, sacrificial vessel, tripod, ding vessel, crucible, (consecrated,
dedicated) transformation; [alchemy]; (a, the) cauldron’s
50.T, Tuan Zhuan
The cauldron
(is) a model
With wood submitted to flame
The offerings (are) transformed
The wise ones (are) fulfilled with offerings to the highest divinity
And (there is) great fulfillment (in) nourishing wisdom (and) excellence
Reaching in with ears (and) eyes, quickening (and) clarifying
The flexible advances with elevated conduct
Gaining the center and resonating with the firm
And so this is, accordingly, supreme fulfillment
354

50.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 14: Da You, Big Domain
(Fan Yao 14.1: no deal with harm, to never be wrong is hard)
A cauldron with upended feet
Worthwhile to expel the stagnating
Accepting a concubine for the sake of her child
Is without blame
50.1x A cauldron (with) upended feet:
As yet nothing improper
* Worthwhile to expel the stagnating:
In order to attend to (what is) valued
It might be a matter of principle to adhere to things as they are, for loyalty’s sake,
or abide by promises made at some earlier time. But when this comes to alchemy,
and service to higher purposes, what stays fixed in time is the log or the lead, and
neither of these is the outcome desired. The cauldron might be filled with hot food,
but if the food is no longer good, the cauldron should be overturned. A noble might
have a faithful wife by his side, but if she cannot give him heirs, the concubine can.
The cauldron transforms the old, makes it entirely new, but blame sees only the past.
The hope of transformation, indeed, the hope for our future, might lie opposed to a
truth which is static or ritual. When it does, a better future can rightly be thought to
come first, and the means which might be questioned today be justified tomorr