Yin-
Yang school would play an important role in two future currents, discussed later
(Xiang Shu and Fang Shi , which were to be recombined in the Song dynasty).
In 221, the Warring States period and the Zhou dynasty finally came to an
end when the most powerful of the warlords, Qin Shihuang, reduced the number
of sovereigns to one, uniting not only the China of the Zhou, but new territories
as well. This was the Qin dynasty. Although this only lasted fifteen years (221-
207) it was marked by sweeping cultural and geographic un ification, codification
of law, the abolition of f eudalism, the standardization of measures, and linguistic
reform (especially of the written characters, which came much closer to “modern”
Han form). This reign was heavily influenced by the l egalists, especially by Li
 Si,
515

the prime minister. And institutional legalism (no big surprise) soon turned into
malignant intolerance of what would much later be termed “counterrevolutionary
thinking.” The sovereign would rewrite history. This cleansing of both old and
unacceptable ideas began with a ban on all unsanctioned teachings and private
libraries. Poetry, history and the teachings of the various philosophers were
forbidden. This escalated, in 213, into what is called the Burning of the Books,
which explicitly spared only certain works on agriculture, animal husbandry,
medicine and divination. The Zhouyi escaped, but most of the accounts of its
history were probably lost. And possibly other versions. Being a lone survivor
would make the Yi a center of philosophical attention for a brief time, but the
climate for scholars was grim. If an intellectual was caught citing the classics in
conversation, or applying the lessons of history in a critique of Qin p olicy, the
penalty was death. It is said that 460 scholars (and fang shi ) were buried alive,
and this was only one method of execution.
We may never know even an approximate quantity of what was lost. We are
told by Li Xin (46 BCE - 23 CE), a compiler of the Han Im perial Library, that many
books came out of hiding after the Qin dynasty fell, especially in the Han D ynasty
reign of Wen Di (179-157), and back into the hands of “scholars of wide
learning.” Thus, the disaster may not have been as complete as the one the west
suffered (in the range of 700,000 scrolls) at the “daughter” library at Alexandria,
which the Christians burned to the ground in 391 CE because it was known to
contain pagan materials. There is a popular English expression: “You don’t know
what you’ve got ‘til it’s gone.” There was at least one useful consequence of the
Burning of the Books, a lesson learned about diversity: disseminate to survive.
This may have been a powerful education for the scholars of the Han Dynasty to
follow. This also may have driven Confucian teachings further into the protected
space or umbrella of the Yi. But also, since nobody could be certain of a specific
work’s antiquity, authenticity or reliability anymore, this state of confusion was
also a midwife to pseudepigrapha, forgery and much wild exaggeration.
The Early or Western Han Dynasty (206 
BCE to 24 CE) proved a marked
climatic improvement for scholars and philosophy. The challenge to rewrite the
classical ideas combined with the benefits of a more unified empire and its new
linguistic standards. Even as Confucianism waxed mighty in inner political circles,
it grew by incorpor ating several of its rivals, so that by the time it was finally
instituted as the orthodox system of thought in 136, it had become an umbrella of
protection for several other schools. With particular relevance to the Zhouyi, the
Shi Yi or Ten Wings were nearly complete at the start of this era. Here, too, Jia Yi
(213-168) began to bring the doctrine of the Yin-Yang School into the Confucian
world. The Han sovereigns were hungry for advice about the combination of
sovereignty and wisdom. Wen Di (r. 179-157) tried in earnest to become a model
sovereign in the Confucian i mag