in. Meetings like this with the
powers that be, or the peaks of the human experience, seem to avoid all the boredom
well enough. But when they crest, expect to relocate quickly and have somewhere
to go in mind. This glut of compelling experience might be avoidable, given some
serious speed, a way out and a clear path to high ground. The wise will make room
by letting it move them. The tough are already long gone. And who knows? Plan B
in prospect is seldom superior; in retrospect, it is always the good one, or the hidden
plan of the spirits and gods, that we just could not see until we awakened. What this
is will change what we are. This is critical mass and an exigent transit. Now we will
not stay the same even more than before. If you step in this river twice you are done.
Above and beyond is the call, to life in interesting times. Have we then overestimated
ourselves and degrees of commitment? Now’s the time to take a deep breath and go.
221

28.M, Key Words
Inundation, saturation, surcharge, extremity, crisis, emergency, stress, pressure
Encroachment, transgression, overload, live load, hurried adapting, resilience
Surpassing, overwhelming, extraordinary, too much; going beyond, transition
Peak experience, stretching limits, pushing envelopes; more than bargained for
Excess, unleashing, abnormality, heavy matters, under strain, humbling events
Going far beyond, greatly transcending, greeting something greater than yourself
28.G, From the Glossary
da4 (to be) accomplished, best, better, big, complete, critical, crucial, developed,
enormous, entire, extreme, far, full, fully grown, good, grand, great(er, est), high,
heavy, large(r), (very, greatly) important, long, loud, major, mature, more, most,
mighty, noble, noteworthy, old, overall, (more, most) perfect, pure, realized, ripe,
seasoned, serious, significant, strong, successful, vast, whole, wholesome, vital; a
lot of, full of, lots of; master-, (a, the) completeness, (full) development, entirety,
grand(eur, ness), greatness, g rowth, (great) importance, majority, vastness, whole-
ness largesse, maturity; a great deal, (very) much, very; already, entirely, fully,
completely, greatly, thoroughly, wholly, en masse , well-; of (great, crucial, vital)
importance
guo4 (to) go beyond, go past, exceed, surpass, transcend, miss, stray from, pass
(by, over); bypass, get by, transgress, trespass, stray, err, inundate, predominate,
exceed proper limits; (s, ed, ing); (to be) passing, transient, errant, past, in excess,
extreme, exceptional, too much (of), excessive, beyond, above, overly, unusual,
extraordinary; greater/larger than; (a, the) error, transgression, fault, excess (ive-
ness) (s); will err; to a fault, to extremity, to excess, to extremes
28.T
Greatness in excess
Greatness is that which exceeds
The ridgepole bends:
Beginning (and) end (are) yielding
The firm (is) excessive but central
(Be) adaptable and glad to move
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
And after this, fulfillment
Greatness in excess’s opportune timing (is) very important now!
222

28.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 43: Guai, Decisiveness
(Fan Yao* 43.1: vigorously advancing toes, going not successful)
For cushions, using white thatch grass
Make no mistakes*
28.1x Cushioning with white thatch grass:
The flexible is on the bottom
He offers a fine, little sacrifice, that the world might treat him more gently. Sweet
incense wafts through the room and his offering mats of woven, white mao grass
cushion his delicate gifts. It is timely, now, to show his great care and to act with a
great carefulness. It’s hard to think that these little things might truly alter the course
of great events. We do not yet know just how much protection these little white mats
will afford if and when the floodwaters rise over the threshold and the roof comes
crashing down. But isn’t it odd that the mats are made out of roof thatch? Maybe he
prays for less interesting times than those that Greatness in Excess promise to give.
Maybe he feels lowly