ittering captives
everywhere.  These people are sure that this is how the Early Zhou Chinese used
to think and talk. And because they are able to praise each other as experts, and
provide impressive looking sets of footnotes from their cohorts to fall back upon,
they are almost getting away with it. The comical aspect has a downside though -
resources are being diverted from more useful pursuits. These scholars could be
doing filing or something.
Even writers who dismiss these modernist interpretations as irrelevant t
o
what the Zhouyi was (shortly) to become, or simply as someone else's tea, are now
qualifying their dismissals by acknowledging that these unusual interpretations
were indeed the very meanings intended by the original  Zhouyi authors when the
book was first compiled. They don't even say "some" of the meanings. And they
3

are still acknowledging as valid and true the many faulty premises upon which
the modernist views are based. And so, perhaps whenever they can, they will give
lip service to these ideas by writing off or censoring an ethical or philosophical
gloss as an anachronism. But according to what other rule or assumption are
none of these ethical or philosophical glosses to be found in the original? In fact,
while all of the premises of the modernists have been presented as established
fact, not one of them has ever even been seriously or adequately questioned.
There is a broad spectrum of hypotheses and stands to take between wide
and narrow latitude, from pure speculation, through various levels of assumptions
about the received tradition, to these narrow and rigorous attempts at academic
expertise. I eventually had to come to a decision about admitting that I would be
speculating instead of claiming certainty at the level of one of these experts. So
here is that confession: I am not one of these experts. I make no claim to being an
academic scholar. I am somewhat thankful that they exist, because they have in
fact made a lot of useful discoveries, and I even have some respect left for some of
them, but I would be mo st embarrassed to be one. Their methodologies are so
flawed in so many ways that I will shortly use a point by point critique of them as
a springboard to describing my own approach. But just in case you are starting to
worry that I am going to channel material from our alien masters on Tau Ceti
Prime, do not be concerned. I intend to hold all of my interpretations accountable
and use an objective template to review the consequences of my hypotheses.
This, as simply as I can put it, is the template: a) if the translation makes no sense
at all, it is wrong, b) every word must make sense in each context in which it
occurs and  c) the fiddling with the glosses (translation options for each word)
stops when a minimum of assumptions yields a maximum of meaning and sense.
Divination
It is in part due to an accident of ancient technology that we have come to
see the twin religious activities of divination and sacrifice as the central foci of
early Chinese civilization. These were among the few activities which absolutely
required recordation on materials durable enough to survive burial to the present
day. We do know enough to 
say with confidence that divination and sacrifice
were vital aspects of the culture, and that they both justified the po litical system
and held it together. Ritual functions were a significant part of the sovereign's
job. But to hear the scholars discourse in their field of expertise, the sovereign
and his nobles had time for, and thought of, very little else. In their m inds this
subject even closes back in on itself so that the primary function of the Yijing is
to assist in divinations about sacrifice. Not once will they make mention of such
other minor matters of state as the proper education and training of the heirs to
political power.
Some of the dictionaries on divination:
Webster's: 1) The practice of determining the hidden significance or cause of
events, sometim