set of large jars, which
were engraved with the symbols and placed in the house so that, as ideas were
agreed upon, notes could be placed in them. These notes might contain anything
which could be written down, such as images and metaphors; proverbs, sayings
and verses, along with new insights on their im plications; and most especially the
prognostications and formula of your craft, wherever useful similarities existed. It
would not be necessary to cover all of the ground over which these sixty-four
508

could be spread, but it would be necessary to sow seeds in all sixty-four of the
territories. The first cursory round with the sixty-four took many long months.
You had agreed by now that this was merely the first of many phases of your
task. Further, taking a cue from your understanding of the dyad, there would be a
process to undo much, if not most, of your work. Thus far, you had been growing
this system, this vocabulary or set of notations, with its jars now almost half full of
associations, in accord almost strictly with its own internal grain, its own rules of
pattern, the Dao of its own self-contained system. It bore no proven relationship
yet to the world outside of your walls. The first of your group to depart left this
insight as one of his reasons. He also cited what he called a needless complexity,
which would make this new system unwieldy. In doing so, he helped to confirm
the next step. Shell and bone divination was to continue for many decades, if not
for centuries, and this was to r emain the primary form of divination for the King
(and the Duke of Zhou). All of the important decisions of the dynasty continued
to be made according to these. You gradually began to look at the two systems
together, and use them at the same time while addressing the same questions. To
accomplish this practice, one of your group had to develop a way to manipulate a
bundle of the Yarrow stalks, which by now you linked to the figures themselves,
so that Ling, in its own mysterious way, could determine the specific diagram and
text without any intervention by human motivation or intention. Your system of
assigned meanings and annotations, meanwhile, would lose most of its content in
this process. And you also lost your second member, who had been much more
enthusiastic about the growth of the system than she was about its decimation by
facts. She feared that this deconstruction would be nearly total. But once again, a
lost member’s reasoning helped in shaping the next phase of your process. The
system would be expanded again, around its remaining pieces. It could do this: i
t
was not only a system built up of metaphors, it was also a system for generating
them.
It was shortly after this that the Duke unveiled his latest theory of stressed or
Changing Lines, which he had been tinkering with since the loss of his father,
many years before your group was to be convened. This would be the dimension
which truly brought vectors of change into the system. Suddenly there was a
dimension which practitioners of your craft could bring a great familiarity to bear
upon: these changes were much like the cracks. And yet they had a won derful
new aspect: while the cracks moved outward from a point of origin, in a known
direction, and made specific turns, they had no specified destination. With the
Changing Lines, the destination was indicated. Meanings for the Lines could
then be developed by moving partway in meaning between the original and the
resultant diagrams. There was a good reason why the Duke had waited until this
point in the process to present this idea, and a reason that he would change the
subject whenever a mem ber of your group would begin to express hints of this
possibility: he wanted to wait until the meanings of the diagrams had been at least
partially developed or fleshed out and had undergone a degree of testing.
The next phase of your project began. It was not long before you realized
that another level of structure would be