ed)
* The man who never alters his opinions is like standing water and breeds reptiles
of the mind. —William Blake
* In the practical use of our intellect, forgetting is as important as remembering.
 —William James
* One way of looking at the history of the human group is that it has been a
continuing struggle against the veneration of crap.  Our intellectual history is a
chronicle of the anguish and suffering of men who tried to help their contem-
poraries see that some part of their fondest beliefs were misconceptions, faulty
assumptions, superstitions, and even outright lies.
—Neil Postman and Charles Weingartner, Teaching as a Subversive Activity
166

GUA 19, LIN2, TAKING CHARGE
 
  Binary 110 000 = 48; Dui below, Kun above
19.X, Overall Image
Above the pool is earth
Taking charge
The noble young one, accordingly,
instructs and plans without exhaustion,
Accepts and secures the people without drawing boundaries
The water table rises as the earth begins to thaw, the seeds grow damp and ready
to open up. The sap is rising fast and the time to relax is quickly departing. Farmers
are busy clearing and plowing their fields, laying the groundwork for summer and
fall. Workers would be less inexhaustible were this not a seasonal thing, but they’ve
had all winter to get themselves ready. Now needs have snuck up in a hurry and it’s
time to get dirty and muddy and sweaty. The nobles have set their teams into motion,
according to plans made beforehand, resources rise up to meet the occasion. It is not
the time to manage the workers in detail: they coordinate and delegate from above.
19.0, Taking charge
The greatest fulfillment rewards persistence
To arrive in the eighth month* would be unfortunate
If the best rewards persistence, wish for hard work instead of good luck. Aquifers
rise, work wells up too, saturated with timeliness. The seed has had its long winter
to sort out ideas for sprouting. As its day to get growing quickly approaches, any
pause now has a purpose. Admiring the progress to date, so fit to the eighth month,
is trouble in the twelfth. Overseers step back only to look for oversights. Could it
be time to pause and admire the work, when no work is done yet? Actions should
not be postponed. The farmer must stay a full step ahead of the vigorous weeds and
stand in as wet nurse for clouds if the rains fail to come. Creative problem solving
is not theoretical now, but intelligence on the run. Even to take a moment now means
to look sideways for unseen solutions and trends, to find a way to put the world’s
inertia to work and even make what is missing do tasks. Old successes only mean
things learned and useful now: one is that you don’t know when the rains will come.
Seed must be broadcast by then. The season’s promise taken for granted is empty.
The success of the spring will be known in the fall, that of the leap in the landing.
167

19.M, Key Words
To manage, preside, conduct, oversee, supervise, allocate, deploy; due diligence
Commitment, approach, engagement, assuming command, taking responsibility
Accession, rising to the occasion, getting involved, going to work, undertaking
Groundwork, prospect-us, preparation; ripe timing, moment at hand, imminence
Warming up, intending to do, mapping out things to be done; rolling up sleeves
Step up, gear up, tool up; implement, getting into position; on threshold, about to
19.G, From the Glossary
lin2 (a, the) management, undertaking, oversight, responsibility, supervision,
commitment, accession, prospect, project, prospectus; exalted approach; (to)
supervise, oversee, manage, take command, take charge, commit (oneself), arrive,
near, approach, go to, be about to, view from above, look down on, look in on,
inspect, condescend to, favor (s, ed, ing); (to be) temp orary, provisional, ad h oc,
near to, about to, on the brink of, imminent, at hand; [rolling up sleeves, getting
down and dirty]
19.T, Tuan Zhuan
Taking charge
Firmness penetrates and so prevails
Satisfaction along with acc