.. Perhaps the entire system of organismic thinking was in one sense the
mirror image of Chinese bureaucratic society. Not only the tremendous filing system of the
[Yijing], but also the symbolic correlations in the stratified matrix world might be so
described. Both human society and the picture of Nature involved a system of coordinates, a
4

tabulation framework, a stratified matrix in which everything had its position, connected by
the ‘proper channels’ with everything else. [p. 337-8]
In his doctoral thesis, George Fendos, adds a few more pieces:
[Summarizing “Analogy, Mysticism and the Structure of Culture,” Current
Anthropology, Apr, 1983]: Sheldon Klein “sees the hexagrams of the [Yijing] as part of a
metasystem for generating rel ational data b ase structures that supplies the rules for
qualifying abstract images and guides the computation of metaphors. The rules consist of
equivalence sets of abstract and concrete terms that are markers of classification categories
covering the whole range of traditional Chinese world knowledge. ... [R]ules are encoded in
this system as analogical operators that relate situational state descriptions and allow for
quick response.” [p. 118]
[Of the XCZ]: Organism refers to a vital whole the properties and functions of which
are determined not only by the properties and relations of its individual parts (mechanical
view), but by the character of the whole which they compose and by the relations of the
parts to the whole. The philosophy of organism entails an analogy wherein properties and
relations within an entity not a vital whole are seen as correlating to those in an organism ... .
In the [Yijing] the analogy at work  implies that the nature and processes operating in the
[Yijing] are the same as those operating in the real world. [p. 185]
Gerald Swanson [The Great Treatise: Commentary Tradition to the Book of Changes,
PhD Thesis, Univ. of WA, 1974] asserts t hat the doctrine of macrosm / microsm [sic] is
only one of four forms of argument from analogy in the [XCZ]. The other three are social-
political, technological, vitalistic. [p. 278]
The above lays the groundwork for what I will term the linguistic model (note that I do
not use the term analogy). The fourteen Xiao G ua can behave a
s combinatory radicals, as
vocabulary elements or as subjects, following rules of lex emics. The sixty four Gua are
combinations of subject and adverbial predicate. The sets of two, three and six Places (Wei)
are transitive prepositional predicates. The dimensional rules for the quasi-algebraic
combination of symbols constitute the morphology. The operations of change are a syntax.
The sum of the valid Xiang Shu dimensions within the superstructure itself (which defines
the parts of speech) is the Yijing’s grammar. The Yi Li aspects are vocabulary elements, and
are the dimensions most subject to change (but not elimination) by accretion and deletion.
And yet the structure of the system as a whole holds the changes in vocabulary in check.
The vocabulary elements, being finite in number and “defined” in contrast with each
other’s boundaries within the context of larger geometrical patterns (parts of speech), are all
subordinate to the larger structures. This function was hinted at in a comment on the
“compare counterparts” sections in Xiao Gua, the Small Symbols Thus is the summed
vocabulary development herein more akin to a thesaurus or a taxonomy than a di
ctionary.
The Xiang S hu elements, in contrast, change by invention and discovery according t o
implicit structural and mathematical rules.
This last comment is important. And here an analogy to DNA is appropriate. It is this
set of rules which allows the Dragon to travel in Time, to undergo the multitude of changes
made by commentators and scribes and even self-correct the corresponding multitude of
errors. The Yijing’s structure is its negative entropy, its means of self-rectification and
5

continuance (heng) regardless of the non-viable mutati