s this might be
the way of most madness, whether it has or is method: its aim is to keep a life going,
to keep the embers alive. Mind has become the lower priority. If sanity means being
responsible, able to be held accountable, and the conscience finds only blind alleys
and impasse, or a certain death in resistance, then let the illusions begin. To remain
unnoticed means showing no light at all. Misery’s night may be centuries long, but
light is centuries longer. A well man can drool, then stop. The madman cannot stop.
36.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 22: Bi, Adornment
(Fan Yao 22.6: plain white elegance, no mistake)
Instead of light, darkness
At first rising into the sky
But at last going into the earth
36.6x At first rising into the sky:
To illuminate the four domains
* At last going into the earth:
Disregarding due order
He might have illumined all four quarters from the great heights life allowed him.
Yet he would neither see light nor be light, so all that he gained was a great height
to fall from. Since the earth will swallow us all, creepers and fliers alike, it is nothing
more than a choice in the long run: of how extremely to spend a life, or to spend it in
wisdom or waste it. While the tyrant lived, he helped to dim the future of darkness,
so maybe some tyrants to come will not be allowed such long life. Why are humans
so damnably slow to learn these lessons they live for? This world still invites evil
to flourish. The tyrant might even be buried right next to the sage. How is this fair?
His grave even flowers more beautifully, from all of the spit and the feces, while the
sage’s is barren, salted by generations of tears. Fair is that we are still able to learn.
273

36, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 06, Song, Contention
qian gua (inverse): 35, Jin, Expansion
jiao gua (reverse): 35, Jin, Expansion
hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release
shi er di zhi (12 branches): No Family
36, Notes
* 36.1-6 There are said to be several possible his torical references here in the line
texts: 1) Bo Yi, 2) Wen Wang, 3) Wu Wang, 4) Wei Zi, 5) Ji Zi, 6) Zhou Xin.
* 36.5 Jizi (c. 1038 
BCE) was an aristocrat, perhaps an uncle of the tyrant Zhou
Xin, who tattooed his body and feigned madness to avoid participating in his dark
era and avoid persecution for criticizing the tyrant’s policies. When the dark reign
was over his sanity reappeared. But he is said to have declined to serve the Zhou
court as well. A good Western parallel may be found in William Shakespeare’s
Hamlet, who also did some damage in the darkness.
36, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Tipareth in Assiah
* Tarot: Six of Pentacles (Investment)
* Astrology: Sol in Earth
36, Quotations
* Advise if this be worth attempting, or to sit in darkness here, hatching vain
empires. —Milton, Paradise Lost
* The greatest vested interest is not property but ignorance. —Jacob Jovanovich
* Live unknown. —Epicurus
* For this is hardest of all: to close the open hand out of love, and keep modest as
a giver. —Nietzsche, TSZ #23
* You would play upon me, you would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me from my lowest note to the top
of my compass .... Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, you
cannot play upon me. —Shakespeare, Hamlet
* Though this be madness, yet there is method in’t. —ibid.
* Dark ain’t so bad if you know what’s in it. —Sid Fleishman
* Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out. —Oscar Wilde
274

GUA 37, JIA1 REN2, FAMILY MEMBERS
 
  Binary 101 011 = 43; Li below, Xun above
37.X,  Overall Image
Wind comes forth from flame
Family members
The noble young one, accordingly, speaks with substance
And acts with consistency
The fire glows on the hearth. With a roof to keep the warmth in and children to take
it outside, it is always unseasonably warm here, the ideal and model climate inside
with radiant heat for a sun. The well-tended fire at home has its effects on the world.
Illumination and warmth mature, and then enter our larger