Zhouyi. The Gua Ming of Qian1, at least when it is
glossed as Modesty (instead of Hamster Crunching) is fraught with a number of
connotations which are inconsistent with the ideas being set forth here. Modesty
can carry implications of false humility and self-effacement, or connote a toady or
a sycophant. The Zhouyi uses this device to dismantle these illusions. The very
554

idea that modesty can be applied to the achievement of great and ambitious ends
(and later, that modesty can even be used to set an army in motion) sets up a kind
of tension which is broken only with the understanding that something closer to
Honesty, Authenticity or Maturity is being portrayed here.
27.6
* The source of nourishment. Awareness of danger brings good fortune. It
furthers one to cross the great water. (Wilhelm)
* (At) the source of the appetites. Brutal (but) promising. Worthwhile to cross the
great stream.
For me this one calls up the image of two missionaries sitting in a big old
cannibal cookpot. But in any event, this far across the great water, the tables can
turn and predator can quickly become prey. The food chain is actually a nutrient
cycle. The corresponding line in the zhi gua is the one beyond hope of returning,
which was repeated in the west as Napoleon's winter march on Moscow.
28.1
* The first line, divided, shows one placing mats of the white mao grass under
things set on the ground. There will be no error.  (Legge)
* (For) cushions, using white thatch grass. Make no mistakes.
This is an example of irony. W hile precaution is called for here, and this
behavior shows what is ordinarily admired as a civilized, aesthetic sense, what is
needed here and now is a heads-up brand of caution. Elsewhere else in the Gua
texts the roof is about to come down. These little woven white place mats are
seriously misplaced. The Zhouyi will frequently trap someone who has moved on
to the Yao Ci texts but has already lost sight of the theme of the Gua as a whole.
43.5
* In dealing with weeds, firm resolution is necessary. Walking in the middle
remains free of blame. b) The middle is not yet in the light. (Wilhelm)
* Wild greens (on) dry land. Determined to uproot. To balance the behavior is not
a mistake. 43.5x The center has not yet been honored.
This is irony again. Our dedicated gardener has too much force and not
enough sense. Not only is he destroying salad greens as weeds, they are growing
voluntarily on a hill, where no plowing or irrigation is necessary. Presumably he
will then replace them with something more delicate, which needs more weeding,
and will require that water be run uphill to meet its needs. This is not the world's
first permaculturist here, and not the path of least resistance. The character is
demonstrating the normally praiseworthy virtue of persistence, but without this
being in balance (Zhong1) it is not a virtue yet.
555

44.3
* His haunches have been flayed and he walks totteringly – trouble, but no great
error!  44.3x His walking totteringly implies being able to walk without being
dragged. (Blofeld)
* A rump with no skin. One’s progress (is) second-rate now. Brutal. (But) not a
complete mistake. 44.3x Advancing (but) now not being dragged.
The Gua text was right: the woman was powerful. It was not at all useful
to court that woman. Apparently little helmet-head has been demonstrating poor
leadership skills for some time now. This represents one of the forms of humor
specific to the Yi, preying upon the reader who has lost sight of the theme of the
Hexagram as a whole, in this case Restraint. However, ropes, chains and other
kinds of restraints may indeed have been involved. But he has learned his lesson,
and now he is no longer bound, leashed or tethered. Maybe some sweet nurse ... .
47.5
* His nose and feet are cut off. Oppression at the hands of the man with the
purple knee bands. Joy comes softly. It furthers one to make offerings and
libations. b) Thus one attains good fortune. (Wilhelm)
* Nose cut off, feet c