o soon for ethical ideas, particularly if the
Zhouyi was even in the least part intended to have anything to do with the
education and training of young nobility. Even the broader culture, not just the
inner court, was moving past the culture's mythological stage. And remember that
ethical ideas do indeed go way back, almost as far as laws do, and certainly much
further than metaphysics. Hammurabi's code is far older than the Zhouyi. But
Waley's expression of doubt here at least suggests the advisability of using a law
of parsimony: Start with the concrete and see how  much sense that makes. Then
seek to understand it as m agic and myth, then as a metaphor or analogy, then as
an abstract ethical philosophy. The trick is in knowing when to stop. To me that
is not until you reach the first place where the translation is worth writing down.
Yuan Heng Li Zhen
This sentence, which begins the Zhouyi, is to me without question the
most overthought and over-elaborated statement in the long history of the Yijing.
I read it as a simple bit of advice which has been rendered all but invisible by its
obviousness and clarity, loosely: "The greatest rewards are the result of sustained
hard work." But it also carries the implications that the rewards are for an offering
or sacrifice to a divine or spiritual level of existence, and that the hard work i
s for
something meaningful and true enough to survive time's trials.
Commentators from the Warring States and the Ten Wings onward have
heaped uncountable associations and connotations upon these four words, and
in doing so they have also given them a grammatical equivalence in the sentence,
which erroneously treats them as a list of four parallel ideas. The Confucians got
this ball rolling in earnest when they eagerly assigned the four to the social
virtues they were promoting. And now there are even instances of translators
applying Shao Yong’s Song dynasty work to them. But while it is true that t hese
four eventually came to represent the si shi or the four seasons, with all their later
symbolic associations and hermetic assignments, this was not at all the case in the
Zhouyi. Even if the four characters are a nice fit to the ideas of four seasons
(which they are) these associations do not belong in a study of the Zhouyi until
you are studying its effects on later culture. But what does belong, and how can
you tell? The modernists have exhausted the other extreme by trying to represent
the whole idea with methodically stunted glosses.
Let's start with a look at eight sets of glosses. The first four are from four of
the twelve dictionaries I've used the most. The next four are from translations by
academic scholars.
21

Yuan Heng Li Zhen
Schussler First Xiang Profitable Lower Ba Gua
Principal Enjoy Use Advantage Test, Try Out
Great Offering Benefit Correct
Karlgren Principle Penetrate Profitable Test, Verify
Supreme Favorable Examine
Primary Sharp Read Oracle
Wieger 1st Cause Pervade Profit Continuance
Origin Efficacity Interest Persevering
Principle Success Sharp Virtuous
Mathews First Pervade Profit To Divine
Chief Succeed Advantage Virtuous
Principal Gain Upright
Kunst Very Xiang Favorable Determination
Great Treat To Determine
Grand Offering
Shaugnessy Primary Reception Beneficial To Determine
Offering
Rutt Supreme Offering Favorable Augury
Whincup Supremely Blessed Favorable Keep On
Yuan and Li, used here as modifiers, seem to stir up little controversy or
dissent, even when they are not perfectly understood. Yuan is the superlative, the
most original, most sublime, supreme, highest, best, greatest, etc., depending on
what the word is modifying and what aspect of this is most deserving of p raise. It
is mistakenly glossed in the Wings as simply Da, or great. Li may be understood as
profit or advantage, but not in terms of luck or windfall. This character depicts the
knife of the harvest - it is the kind of advantage that you work or train for, the
reward you m erit, the worth you earn. A