white
A white steed, as if on wings
Not an adversary but a marital suitor
22.4x Six fourth (is) properly positioned
(But) doubted
* Not an adversary (but) a marital suitor:
In the end, no question
He comes on with a dazzling grace here, clad in white, impeccably preened, just like
a transcendent thought, on a winged horse, swift as the wind. The eyes need some
time to adjust. There will of course be questions: what fuels these white-hot flames?
The preacher might wear this same angel suit when leading his flock to the fleecing,
the charlatan wears it too. All want something in the worst way, all are supposed to
be lying like hell. Our fool really is different: he is in love and attempting to mate.
He cannot help himself: he’s so nuts because these are what drive him. The whole
of nature bears testament to the good grace of the mating dance, all the feathers and
flowers and fur. It also drives much of the human economy, even where you can’t
talk about it. This is what our fool flesh is heir to: life simply wants to grow larger.
188

22.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.5: sovereign draws near to family, do not worry)
Dressed up amidst hills and gardens
One’s gift bundle of silk is but a shabby remnant
Embarrassing
But in the end, promising
22.5x Six fifth has promise:
There will be happiness
He lives a simple and frugal life, with good to do, if not not well-to-do. Upper class
life feels foreign. You can live in the ornaments. Rules are different above. He feels
too clean and misplaced. He hasn’t learned half of the gestures, but knows to take
gasses outdoors. He knows the gift he brings is no treasure. He feels like a clown
in these fine, borrowed clothes. Economy here means something entirely different.
Appreciation as well. Poverty and simplicity are not the same thing, although they
might share the same budget. He w ill not need to fake his humility. Life and style
are not utterly meaningless here and the pleasantries make for some pleasantness.
There is good and much work to be done here, which will find its way back down
to the valley. He brings all he can up the hill, wrapped in this shabby silk offering.
22.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 36: Ming Yi, Brightness Obscured
(Fan Yao 36.6: not light, darkness, rise to sky, fall to earth)
Plain white elegance
No mistake
22.6x Plain white elegance is no mistake:
The top attains the goal
From down below in the valley the simple forms did not seem enough. From on top
of it all the perspectives are different. Anything more than a simple, natural form just
feels pretentious and silly. Simplicity too is a kind of a style. The white canvas hides
all the colors of light, and so it contains all the paintings as well. Plainness is not just
for hiding, as silence is not just for filling. Content does not need sham to be beauty:
the highest sort of beauty hides barely inside the obvious, as the ordinary wipes off.
Humanity’s long fall from grace was said to occur near the time when  nakedness
turned into shame, when wearing the sky became wicked, when right and wrong was
draped over the world, when too much extraneous surface was gathered. Fear for the
boundary came along with the boundary. Trash doesn’t belong up here on the peak.
189

22, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 47, Kun, Exhaustion
qian gua (inverse): 21, Shi He, Biting Through
jiao gua (reverse): 56, Lu, The Wanderer
hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
22, Notes
* 22.X Numerous policies as civil administration, as distinct from criminal law, or
Gua 21, the Inverse of 22.
22, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Ayin; Path between Malkuth and Yesod (Trad: Hd-Tp)
* Tarot: The Devil (Nearsightedness)
* Astrology: Tenth House, Cardinal Earth, Capricorn
22, Quotations
* What use is your plaited hair, fool, and your raiment of goatskins. Within you
is ravening and the outside you make clean. —Buddha, The Dhammapada
* What kind of truth is this which is true on one side of the mountain and f