veloped set of meanings and assignments for the two places occupied by the Hu Ti , the
Nuclear, Overlapping or Interwoven Trigrams.
The Ban Xiang dimension is the basis of the 3rd and 4th Wings’ Da Xiang or the
Overall Image text, which w ill normally use prepositions to indicate their positional
relationship. It is also examined frequently in the 1st and 2nd Wings, the Tuan Zhuan,
where the two are often tied together only by a simple conjunction ( e.g. Er : and, and yet,
but), but sometimes by Yi, here meaning behind or uses as in Thunder (below) behind
Flame (above) or Thun
der uses Flame. In this last sense, the relationship is instrumental,
wherein the actor is in the lower position or within and the acted upon is above, ahead or
without. This is consistent with the later development of the Liang W ei meanings. The
names for these Two Places, as used most commonly here, are Zhen and Hui in Chinese
and Lower and Upper in English. These are a few of the Chinese words used in describing
this polarity or dichotomy (all are given in the Glossary with many more meanings):
Zhen Persistent; Focus Hui Changing; Regret
Xia Lower, Below Shang Upper, Above
Nei Inner [Subjective] Wai Outer [Objective]
Ru Entering; Going Into Chu Exiting; Emerging
Lai Coming (to) Wang Going (through)
Xian Earlier; Preliminary Hou Later; Consequent
Shi Beginning; Origination Zhong Ending; Eventuality
Sheng Growing Xiao Dissipating
Ti Formal Yong Functional
At least along the dimensional axis of Ban Xiang, the Hexagram is thus a function of one
force operating in the lower position combining with another in the upper. As discussed in
the Introduction to the Translation, and there termed Portmanteau Analysis (after Marc
Edmund Jones), there are close 
analogs to this quasi-algebraic combination of symbols in
22

the Yi's “sister languages” of Qabalah, Tarot and Astrology. In these systems the linguistic
subject is the analog of the lower position and the adverbial predicate that of the upper. For
partial examples, in the Qabalah this might take the form of a Sephiroth operating in one of
the Four Worlds; in the Tarot, one of the Numbers operating in one of the Suits; and in
Astrology, one of the Planets acting through a particular Sign. In the simplest terms, the
Lower is Subjective, the Who; the Upper is Objective, the How. Or: the Lower is the
“coming to” a situation while the Upper is the “going through” ( Lai Wang).
To extend the above a little further: The Zhen or Lower ( Ba) Gua describes the
converging forces of the situation, the coming together of its vectors, one’s personal
momentum or reasons for being there, bases, motives, needs, hopes and potentials: the past
arriving at presence. Zhen is persistence, commitment or focus and might be glossed as
Heng, Continuity (Gua 32), that which persists (or tries to). In contrast, the Hui or Upper
(Ba) Gua describes the diverging possibilities of the situation, the choices or alternatives
and the subsequent directions, one’s potential for growth and change, what the inner needs
to adjust to, the positions of others, what is offered, the skills, tools and raw materials of
one’s art: the present arriving at the new. This is Hui , regret, problems or trouble, a
delightfully tongue-in-cheek piece of nomenclature, perhaps even designed to lighten one’s
anxieties about the future: here’s the trouble you’re in. Etymologically, the word Hui is t
o
be many-hearted, to have regret for the choices forgone, or for what might have been.
Now recall the earlier discussion under Gua X u, the Hexagram Sequences, of the
Xian Tian Ba Gong, the Eight Houses of the Primal Heaven. This eight-by-eight matrix grid
is dimensioned or cross-referenced by the Lower and Upper Trigrams. Recall too, in the
Xiao Gua about Ba Gua, that the Trigrams can be seen or nuanced differently in the Lower
and Upper Places, as Zhen or Hui (Ba) G ua. This Eight House grid offers sixty-four
unique permutations, or different relationships of Subjecti