thinks himself mighty should try pulling oxcarts around.
42.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.2: call of crane in shadows, her young respond)
Somebody grants one ten matched  pairs of tortoise shells
One cannot refuse
Enduring commitment is promising
The sovereign presents offerings to the divine*
Promising
42.2x Somebody grants this:
(It) comes from beyond
There is a resonance in this, a connection of the spirit, and even these special shells
are entrained in the pattern. They have found their way into your hands as blessings,
to count but not question. This wealth is a trust and one wants to be worthy. Even
the king serves this process. Since each shell is used only one time for one question,
you could use many shells up in just asking why, and still there might be no why.
To question the rightness of this is to spend it on the past. Thus it is probably best
to keep this increase going in forward directions - by asking questions of how and
when best. A treasure map can be as good as the treasure, without having all of that
weight yet. The sovereign will want his good name to have a respectable place on his
ancestor’s shrine, but he doesn’t ask why it’s not there yet. This is for tomorrow.
307

42.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 37: Jia Ren, Family Members
(Fan Yao 37.3: familiar ones scolded, regrettable, opportune)
Increase comes by way of unfortunate events
Avoid errors
Hold true and focused in conduct
Report to the prince, offer the jade credential
42.3x Increased by way of unfortunate events:
Certainly hold this (in mind)
The good doctor earns his wealth and repute by taking a sort of advantage of the
ill fortunes of the sick and the dying. The advocate thrives on misunderstandings.
The hero will launch his reputation on somebody else’s mishap. The heir will take
advantage of death in the family. But this does not soil their characters, until they
begin to encourage the illness, feed the strife, cause the disaster or do harm to the
rich, old uncle. Misfortune creates real needs for somebody to take care of, and to
salvage a bad situation merits a reward, a finder’s fee or a bounty. But wherever
this might be abused, the public asserts a right to preserve its level of trust. It only
takes one fireman starting one fire to put a noble profession under a harsher light.
Trust and respect aren’t easy to add to. Much decrease grows from small doubts.
42.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 25: Wu Wang, Without Pretense
(Fan Yao 25.4: may there be loyalty, not a mistake)
Centered in conduct
Advise the prince to comply
It will be worthwhile and practical to perform reliably
in moving the capital
42.4x Advising the prince to comply:
In order to further the purpose
He approaches his prince with the purest intentions, as though he too were a noble.
He proclaims himself a reliable fellow, as an excellent choice for a helper in matters
important to state, such as moving this kingdom’s capital, and guarding the wealth
on the way. He asks, in effect, to borrow a little political power, to further his own
aims in life. His levelness and candor do more than amuse the prince. Great doors
may open up, including the door to the vault. He will be given his chance to back up
his claims. It would take a very pure fool indeed to plan any crafty or ugly surprises.
Both the rewards and the punishments are proportionate to each other, yet both are
out of proportion to the smaller acts which precede them, the acts which will lead to
great increase in one or the other. Nearer the throne, they say, is nearer the gallows.
308

42.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.5: dismissing norms, not suited to great crossing)
Be true and kind-hearted
Do not question sublime opportunity
Be assured that kindness is our worth
42.5x Be true (and) kind-hearted,
Do not question this at all
* Kindness (is) our worth:
A well-earned objective
One’s hunger for reassurance might only complicate things. If you want to know
whether or not you tread the proper path, t