lop, extend, prosper, increase, improve,
enter (upon), make progress, lead, introduce, present, insert (s, ed, ing); (to be)
forward, advanced, far along; (a, the) growth, advancement, progression, pro-
motion, development
35.T, Tuan Zhuan
Expansion
(Means) progress
The light rises over the earth
Compliance along with reliance upon great clarity
The flexible advances, but with superior conduct
And so it is that the prosperous lord uses grants (of) horses
To breed a multitude
(And) by the light of a day three times grants audience
264

35.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 21: Shi He, Biting Through
(Fan Yao 21.1: feet shackled in stocks, hiding toes, no mistake)
So far along to be so frustrated
But persistence is promising
Use wits for confidence
And be tolerant
Not a mistake
35.1x So far along (to be) so frustrated:
All alone (but) advancing with integrity
* To be tolerant is not a mistake:
(Having) not yet been given orders
Someone needs to start forward here, simply to get things moving. Our hero is one
of the first to go forward, a little ahead of his time. He advances to meet the prince,
on triple audience day, but he carries no official charge, nor passport, nor invitation.
He is halted in his progress, still outside of the kingdom’s border, by a guard whose
mistrust is a duty. Without the license or status there is not enough light on him yet
to be seen as more than a nobody. While he might think of himself as a diplomat,
from a short time into the future, he knows that he won’t convince the guard that his
borders are imaginary. And thus, when halted, he bows, with a sunny and plausible
courtesy. He retreats three li.* Then roundabout, in broad daylight, he detours into
the kingdom. It was too soon to get permission. Sometimes liberties must be taken.
35.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 64: Wei Ji, Not Yet Complete
(Fan Yao 64.2: braking those wheels, persistence is promising)
So far along to be so worried
But persistence is promising
Accept these present constraints
as if a blessing from one’s grandmother
35.2x Accepting these present boundaries (as) a blessing:
Applying the central principle
No matter how sunny it is, or it might promise to be, we humans in gross are still in
the dark about how light and bright we could be. When we speak of free markets
and minds, free speech, the free exercise of a faith and even of freedom itself, we are
still speaking of aims and ideals which only a few have attained yet, and not many
more have even begun to grasp. We might be more evolved than those days when
we plucked lice from each other’s fur, but we still have a long way to go. Present
day limits aside, we will waste this fine daylight if we let our lack of advancement
darken our spirits. To find the patience, we need we look back and see how far we
have come. Why would we want to collect our rewards when the work and journey
have only begun? We’ll take gratitude, strength and courage wherever we can get it.
265

35.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 56: Lu, The Wanderer
(Fan Yao 56.3: burns their camp, fails helper, hard to persist)
Many liberties
Regrets pass
35.3x Many liberties extended:
(With) hope for superior conduct
There exist clear reasons why the people should seize and secure certain freedoms.
It often seems less clear that this will serve the ruler as well. Liberty will even serve
the ruler so well that he ought not to wait at all for his people to ask for their rights.
There is no better teacher in life than the consequences of actions, so when actions
are prohibited the teacher goes away, leaving rumors and laws in its place. Liberty
teaches tolerance too. If we have a right which we treasure, we’ll gain a little respect
for another’s right to treasure his own. Freedom then is not duty’s opposite: rather
its reciprocal. Our duty is to your freedoms, that we might enjoy our own. Liberty
helps us evolve as well. When the hundred flowers cannot contend in the garden,
the struggle for existence no longer has selection to show which weeds are worthy.
35.4, 9 4th,