and the vigilant want to relax. They are merely
nearing completion, but already the big celebration begins. The heady wine is passed
freely about in the tavern, in a confident celebration. There is no blame at all in all of
this making merry, but a poor follow-through here can reach backward through time
and mess up a good beginning. The old fox first gets his whole tail across, before he
and his plan for success will share stories. As the arrow takes flight, the bow is still
held steady, the means are held to the end, the trust invested is kept. There is a great
difference between letting go and falling apart. One might need to veer pretty badly
off course to change outcomes now, but this kind of thing might be able to do that.
One wants a grander finale. To dump the wine on his own head is not an apotheosis.
441

64, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete
qian gua (inverse): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete
jiao gua (reverse): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete
hu gua (nuclear): 63, Ji Ji, Already Complete
zhi hu gua (nuclear of): 39, 53, 63, 37
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Kan-Li Family
64, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Yesod in Atziluth
* Tarot: Nine of Wands
* Astrology: Luna in Fire
64, Quotations
* To keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution of intelligent tinkering.
—Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac
* Man has been reared by his errors: 1) he saw himself always imperfect, 2) he
gave himself imaginary qualities, 3) he felt himself in a false position to the animals
and nature, and 4) he always devised new tables of values, and accepted  them for a
time as eternal and unconditioned. —Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom
* Live dangerously. —ibid.
* The report of my death was an exaggeration. —Mark Twain
* We cannot remain consistent with the world save by growing inconsistent with
our past selves. —Havelock Ellis
* Strong hope is a much greater stimulant of life than any realized joy could be.
—Friedrich Nietzche
442

Xiao Gua: The Fourteen Small Symbols
Introduction to Scales
Er Yao, The Two Changing Lines
Si Xiang, The Four Emblems
Ba Gua, The Eight Trigrams
443

Introduction to Scales
Scales, in the sense of the word used in music, may have been a part of our
cultural thinking nearly as long as numbers. Warren S. McCulloch, who pioneered
work in neural net theory and learned that up to six “things” can be perceived  by
these nets without language and counting, was fond of the question: “What is a
number, that a man may know it, and a man, that he may know a number?” The
answer for several millenia was just “big magic,” a formulation which has tended
to disappoint some of us. Around the world, as far as our tribes had spread, there
came a time within each group when numbers were given symbols or names. When
they w ere, for each new number N, there were suddenly not only N things to
count: there was also now a universe which could be divided into N kinds of
things. This problem was usually taken up first by the local wizard or shaman.
Any continuous spectrum, such as that of visible light, sound vibration or
the human experience, can be divided by any whole integer, resulting in a scale.
This does not mean that this division will make enough sense to hold human
attention - there needs also to be a resonance (called ying in the Yi) in the human
psyche, as well as enough simplicity for the scale to be r emembered. When there is,
the scale survives in our lore. For example, in the light spectrum, certain divisions
“feel” more natural. The scale of two divides light into warm and cool colors. Two
scales of three may be used: the additive or light primaries (red, yellow and blue)
and the subtractive (magenta, cyan and yellow). Two scales of four are also
apparent: the printer's black, magenta, cyan and yellow and the human eyeball's
black (rods) and red, green and blue (cones). But six, not five, is the next most
logical division. Attempts to assign colors to the Wu Xing  or Five Agents had to
omit the color of 
the sky.