ing his feet,
or walking it off in his sleep. Yes, the force is extraordinary, but it’s only on general
alert. A direction only shows itself in wear and tear on the rug. The force behind this
movement is real, and it’s as vast as it seems. It drives the tribes through the ages.
If it grows bored it can make a two-headed creature; it evolved the human brain and
half of human culture; it tests itself against chaos itself. Life wants to make more of
itself. We are thus on permanent standby, as eager for chances here as for food. But
progress isn’t made by movement alone: we need to have something to offer as well.241

31.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 45: Cui, Collectedness
(Fan Yao 45.3: what a gathering, what complaints, embarrassing)
Persuaded in one’s loins
Managing those consequences
To continue thus is wretchedness
31.3x Persuaded in one’s loins:
But less than secure
* The purpose lies in pursuing another
The position holds onto the inferior
There is nothing mutual here. Responses lead, not the stimuli; desire is followed,
but not chosen first. When the will pursues what should follow, things become less.
Yes this is chasing tail, no matter whose. This leadership evolved to point the way
to truth, but today truth has moved, to deep behind the beloved’s eyes. All of love
and all flesh is sacred: it has that nerve, along which travels the spirit. And love is
respect for the spirit looking back. This is not the problem: wrongness comes with
being a slave and making objects of subjects. Best is the love of a partner, the next
best is to dream love for spirit. Last is the masterful love of a puppet: this thing is
best left in the closet. One works i nstead on attractive behavior, on having things to
give worth receiving, on being a worthy find. This is love going head and heart first.
31.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao* 39.4: if going is impassable, then coming is alliance)
Persistence is promising
Regrets pass
If unsettled and vacillating in whether to go or come
Your alliances will conform to your thinking*
31.4x Persistence (is) promising, regrets pass:
(Being) less than excited by trouble
* (To be) unsettled (and) ambivalent (in whether) to go (or) come
(Is) less than distinguished (for) greatness
Ambivalence might be better than apathy, but this still wanders all over the place.
Whether he might be coming or going is not known at this time. Movements can
cancel each other out, so others wait to see, to measure a net progress here. A higher
order of purpose can make both advance and retreat  serve our lives in the forward
directions, while a lower purpose or lack of direction can travel much and go only
nowhere or backwards. Friends and alliances pick this up too, and none but those
inescapably bound are inclined to follow in circles - and least of all those partners
we may want to attract. Mixed signals are also easy to read, but the message is still
all wrong and signals will not make a dialogue. It is clarity in what you want and in
what you have to give that gives the purpose both firmness and appearance of health.
242

 31.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 62: Xiao Guo, Smallness In Excess
(Fan Yao 62.5: prince hunts birds in cave, with tethered arrows)
Moved in one’s neck and shoulders
Avoiding regrets
31.5x Moved in one’s neck and shoulders:
The purpose (is) trivial
Maybe he fears getting shot down in flames: one simple no has all the destructive
force of the world’s greatest hyperbole. So he thinks it over, all over again, naming
the ninety-nine ramifications and deciding on higher love, which looks more like an
arm’s length friendship, except for occasional backrubs to work out the tensions.
The forbidden excitement levels diminish; things move from the coarse to sublime.
All those disturbing juices go elsewhere, around a cool and neutral heart, to chill the
higher minds. So why do the neck and shoulders still seize, and need all those rubs?
Why does this still happen so often, as though the excess of caution and fear were
still th