time. We think we wax mighty. Legacies will outlive their
heirs, empires their founders, cultures their sages, oracles their humble scribes, just
as our pools of genes outlive their living forms. And then we are dwarfed again, out
of our own control again, our bonds become chains, our reasons laws. The greatness
we have made does not live and feel. When we lose these true bonds we go too far.
09.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.6: three uninvited guests enter pit, respect them)
It has already rained, it is already settled
Value the merits already conveyed
The woman’s persistence is difficult
as the moon approaches full
The noble young one’s expedition fails
09.6x (It has) already rained, (it is) already settled
The merits (already) gathered (and) conveyed
* The noble young one’s expedition fails:
There is a place for uncertainty
The zephyr subsides and the plump clouds return to dump water on the land. The
mud is some inconvenience, but another season of success is secured. The value
of human virtue is on the rise again. Husband and wife feel important and enduring,
hoping this time it will last. How soon we all want to forget that the final word is
never success, the final state never perfection. A thing to be grateful for becomes
glory, meeting our needs becomes conquest. All these will continue for as long as
the moon stays full. These are not things to found dynasties on. However timely
for this little moment, presumptions upon such simple success are just witless airs,
not stands against the winds of time. The rates and the signs go up and down daily.
If we truly want something that lasts, we could learn a few lessons from changes.
111

09, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 16, Yu, Readiness
qian gua (inverse): 10, Lu, Respectful Conduct
jiao gua (reverse): 44, Gou, Dissipation
hu gua (nuclear): 38, Kui, Estrangement
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Xun-Zhen Family
09, Wai Guang
* Qabalah: Malkuth in Yetzirah
* Tarot: Ten of Swords
* Astrology: Pluto in Air
09, Quotations
* We cannot be kind to each other here for an hour. We whisper, and hint, and
chuckle, and grin at a brother’s shame. However we brave it out, we men are a
little breed. —Tennyson
* A myriad races came and went;
This sphinx hath seen them come and go. —The Kasidah,  tr. Sir R. F. Burton
* The happiness of most people we know is not ruined by great catastrophes or
fatal errors, but by the repetition of slowly destructive little things.
—Ernest Dimnet
* God is in the details. The Devil is in the details.
—Separate sayings. The former came first, the latter is now more popular.
* Small causes are sufficient to make a man uneasy, when great ones are not in
the way: for want of a block he will stumble at a straw. —Jonathan Swift
* Men trip not on mountains, they stumble on stones. —Hindustani proverb
* He that condemneth small things shall fall by little and little. —Ecclesiastes
* These trifles will lead to serious mischief. —Horace
* Take care not to spit against the wind. —Nietzsche, TSZ#28
Note: Thus Spake Zarathustra is quoted often in this section. Quotations are from
the Thomas Common translation, which preserves more of the original’s fun.
112

GUA 10, LU3, RESPECTFUL CONDUCT
 
  Binary 110 111 = 55; Dui Below, Qian above
10.X, Overall Image
The sky above, the lake below
Respectful conduct
The noble young one, accordingly, distinguishes high and low
to steady the human purpose
Out of the mirror-like depths the stars smile up at the people. That infinite dome
above looks so humble and friendly, pretends to be captured. The sage draws lines
between the stars and tells his people encouraging stories, trying to give them just
the right measures of courage and hope to advance at the perfect pace, helping them
to face the night unafraid, upgrading each comprehension one small step at a time,
steadying the human will. “As above, so below,” he might say. But the worth of
this will be tested. If they think too much of themselves, and tread too