) curtail, (pare, cut, break) d own, abridge, strip away, split, lay bare, ex-
propriate, reduce, cut up, skin, peel, flay, deprive, ruin, break, pluck, degrade,
scavenge, loot (s, ed, ing); (to be) decomposing, decadent, unsustainable, dis-
integrating, breaking down; deprived, stripped (of), ill-founded; (a, the) decon-
struction, destruction, deterioration
23.T, Tuan Zhuan
Decomposing
(Means) stripping away
The flexible alters the firm
Not worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
The common people prevail
Accept and stop here
Look at the image
The noble young one respects waning (and) waxing as surplus (and) want
 (And as) heaven’s behavior
192

23.1, 1st 6, Zhi Gua 27: Yi, Hungry Mouth
(Fan Yao 27.1: forsake spirit tortoise, look at me, hang mouth)
Depriving the bed of its legs
To dismiss (such)* persistence is unfortunate
23.1x Depriving the bed of (its) legs:
Thereby to cover up the lowly
There are gnawing sounds in the dark, and slander afoot in the realm. For a while
the intrigue goes unnoticed, but even the littlest rat bites add up. All that they want
is a few small and simple con cessions. Too many have been too hungry too long
and thanks to this poor inspiration they have nothing better to do. The thought or
the basis upon which he comforts himself is not a stable foundation. It is weak in
the basics, with poor legs to stand on. The lowliest things should be the most firm;
the heavier things are better stepped on than carried. Underestimating the problem
is, in fact, the problem and believing conditions are stable will bring collapse even
closer. Better to set the bed on the floor and hit bottom while still up above. Much
cannot hide below the legless bed: no ghosts or assassins, no monsters or thieves.
23.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.2: embrace inexperience, involve women, household)
Depriving the bed of distinction
To dismiss (such)* persistence is unfortunate
23.2x Depriving the bed of (its) frame:
Still not finding support
His bed with its elegant frame sets him apart from the others. He is comforted by
his thoughts of how very special he is. But now he climbs home for some rest at the
end of the day and discovers his bed overturned, all of his loose change gone, and
maybe some of his secrets as well. The warning is implied: he has carried too much
weight to these heights and wrapped himself up in himself. This frame of reference,
that gives him his sense of security, is less than reliable now. Now his boundaries
and his identity are problems instead of solutions. This attitude upon which he rests
comes under attack from below. To possess a good resting place, a comfort zone,
or a cushion in the center of who you are, is a fine and peaceful thing. But defining
this in terms of the envy of others is begging for sleepless nights and bad dreams.193

23.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.3: setting those restrictions, rigors choke the heart)
Curtailing itself is not a mistake
23.3x Curtailing itself is not a mistake:
Let go of high (and) low
There is a place in this world for that which would topple all towers, or overthrow
sleepers and tyrants, destroying their plush, purple couches. Deep in the untouched
forest, life is in balance with death, but not locked in combat: the new will grow out
of the old, the quick will grow out of the rotten. Pruning, restraint and self-limitation
all will serve healthy growth. But we still want to move with the time, as gravity will
show patience with mountains, taking one stone a year, with only occasional drama.
Nor should one try to pop a pimple too soon. When the process is hurried, lessons
of value may not be learned well enough. But bet in the end on decay, of everything
not acting like seed. Then the trick with letting things go is simply to shed the stuff
that gets in the way of tomorrow, letting gravity do the work of hauling this all away.
23.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 35: Jin, Expansion
(Fan Yao 35.4: advance like a rodent, persistence is dangerou