to differing sets of
shared associations, there is not a similar universality in what goes into each of the
four categories. As such, there is no perfect system of translation between all of
these culturally-based systems. Often there is at least one set which can be truly
annoying. The most vexing of these are pointed out in the pages of the Si Xiang ,
the four two-line figures, by underlined notes. The word si, four, does not appear in
the Zhouyi text, but fang, the word used for direction, also means square. The
Scale of Four was very much alive at the time (it is used in the Shujing) and i
t is
implied here in the Zhouyi wherever time and season (shi) are mentioned.
The Scale of Five takes two typical forms: the Pentagram (with five points
equidistant, also called the Seal of Solomon) and the Mandala (the four directions
plus a center). In the west, the former is more common: a “fifth essence,” or quint-
essence, as spirit or aether, was added to the four elements to make the pentagram
(the star pointed upward for purposes of transcendence, or downward for the
purposes of manifestation). The mandala is more common in Asian cultures. This
uses the terms of the Wu Xing , The Five Movements or States of Change: Fire
(Huo), Water ( Shui), Metal ( Jin), Wood ( Mu) and Earth ( Tu). Earth takes the
446

central position in the mandala when this form is used. W hile the Wu Xing  formula
is very ancient, dating back at least to the Early Zhou dynasty, it really has no
home base in the Yijing. Many of the Han dynasty scholars tried to integrate the
two. In the Song, integrations appeared in diagrams which look strikingly like the
Qabalah’s much later “Tree of Life” diagram, but this is too far down history’s
road. More relevant to our purposes here is that the first four of the Wu Xing  (less
Earth) were also used as names for the Si Xiang  or The F our Emblems. This fact
should be remembered when using these as names for the four. I have also made
this omission of the central element in the Wai Guang  segment at the Si Xiang,  or
Four Emblems, when drawing comparisons with the Indian Tattwas, the Wis doms
of Tibet and the Buddhist Khandas.
Only one Scale of Six is developed in the Yi, found in the structure of the
Hexagrams or Gua. Each of the six line places (Yao Wei ) is assigned a number of
meanings, loci within “the time,” and characteristics (Yao De) when occupied by
the different kinds of lines. These are discussed in more detail in Dimensions. In the
west, Scales of Six are depicted in the more familiar form of the Hexagram (adopted
fairly recently by the Jews and there called the Star or Shield of David, Magen
David) with two sets of three shown interlaced and interrelated. But the similarities
between this and the Gua structure end here. In the Hermetic traditions, the six
places are assigned grammatical subjects. In the Yi, the six places take the role of
prepositions, much like the positions in a Tarot spread or the Houses in Astrology.
A nearly forgotten ancient Chinese Scale of Six is found in 
the Shujing  as the Six
Treasuries or Storehouses ( Liu F u): constituted by Grain or Seed, ( Gu) plus the
more familiar Fire, Water, Metal, Wood and Earth. This could have been a precursor
to the Wu Xing before Gu was dropped out.  This is an interesting scale to ponder:
these six, between them, have just about everything necessary to build an ancient
civilization. Without grain for textiles, let alone agriculture, the five would not be
enough.
Scales of Seven and Nine do not appear in the Yi, although they coexisted
in Chinese culture. The numbers seven and nine ( qi and jiu) occur here in both
numerical and metaphorical uses. Seven implies a cycle of return (perhaps from
seven days for a week or a phase of the Moon), and ni ne, an exhaustive process
covering a range of possibilities (such as climbing up the nine hills at 51.2).
The Scale of Eight is represented only by the Ba Gua, the eight three-line
diagrams. Despite the a