nderstand that that which is at variance with itself agrees with
itself. There is a harmony in the bending back, as in the cases of the bow and the
lyre. —Heraclitus, fr. 117
* I am your tongue, your eye. I am your senses, your contentment and anger. Go,
be detached!  That one who hears through me and sees through me is you. Not
only are you the possessor of the secret but you are the secret too. —Rumi
124

GUA 12, PI3, SEPARATING
 
  Binary 000 111 = 07; Kun below, Qian above
12.X, Overall Image
Heaven and earth do not interact
Separating
The noble young one, accordingly,
conserves virtue and avoids trouble
Not allowing himself luxury in the form of compensation
A sacred kind of sadness and heartbreaking beauty accompany the fall. A cold and
indolent sky torments a field of parched grain. You envy those geese going south,
going their own separate ways. The parasites and the rot do have their proper places.
Half of the healthiest forests are death and decay. Not growing is not a stagnation.
Nations, cultures and civilizations have their autumns as well, wherein the parasites
might well belong, when decay might be a good thing. But there is not much here
for a sage or great leader. They may become uninvolved and withdraw to conserve
their resources, not taking bait, not giving wrongness something to rally and live for.
12.0 Separating*
oneself from inferior people*
Those not worth the young noble’s loyalty
Greatness departs, smallness arrives
Greatness is done here. The small move in and seize power. All intelligence leaves
the masses. Now petty tyrants, passive aggressives, parasites and looters take over
the kingdom. Scavengers gnaw on what’s left. Do not fear the wolves here: selection
brought evolution this far. Beware instead of sheep in sheep’s clothing. The wolves
might be their salvation. Priorities now are established by polls, and values by a vote.
Rules will stand in for ethics. Majorities stand just as ready as any dictator could be
to play the part of the tyrant. The will of the people is only peer pressure writ large,
like mob rule but in slower motion. A world goes numb as the work of our glorious
progress is left to decay and gravity. The middle ground is barren, more tedium than
toil. How many times have we done this now? How many cultures collapsed has this
one oracle seen? And yet this is how things should be. The things which have failed
to merit survival fail to survive; things which are not sustainable cannot be sustained.
How evolved and smart can we be and not learn this? So what are young nobles to
do here? Just leave things? Or leave things which can be rediscovered next spring?
125

12.M, Key Words
Disjunction, discontinuity, d isengagement, pulling apart, alienation, indifference
Denial, negation, division, schism, pettiness, aloofness, apathy, numbness, decay
Stagnation, entropy, disorder, decadence, standstill; to misunderstand, disapprove
Ignorance, small-mindedness, lowest common denominators, leaders out of touch
Stratification, abstraction, disintegrity, disarray, dissonance, disharmony, discord,
Non-participation, non-cooperation, negating and the need to negate, wrongness
12.G, From the Glossary
pi3 (to be) inferior, wrong, worthless, decaying, bad, stagnant, stagnating, disin-
tegrating, alienated, inappropriate; (to) deny, refuse, stop, negate, disapprove (of),
separate (from) (s, ed, ing); on the contrary; not, if not, or not, not do; ( a, the)
standstill, stagnation, separation, disintegrity, negation, denial, incoherence; [en-
tropy]; what is not so; not, wrong; also pronounced fou3: to not be, if not, if out of
12.T, Tuan Zhuan
Separating oneself from inferior people
(Who) are not worth a noble young one’s loyalty
Greatness departs, smallness arrives:
When this occurs heaven (and) earth do not interact
And so the myriad beings do not communicate
High (and) low do not interact
And so all under heaven lack government
Within (is) darkness and without (is) light
Within (is) weakness and wit