use with us if you cannot follow
through? You want to fly and are not proof to dizziness? Did we force ourselves
on you, or you on us? —Goethe, Faust
* These are the times that try men’s souls. —Thomas Paine
* Great necessities call out great virtues. —Abigail Adams
* Do not be afraid to take a big step if one is indicated. You cannot cross a chasm
in two small jumps. —David Lloyd George
* In a time of drastic change it is the learners who inherit the future. The learned
usually find themselves equipped to live in a world that no longer exists.
—Eric Hoffer
* Reality is the leading cause of stress amongst those in touch with it.
—Jane Wagner (and Lily Tomlin)
* May you live in interesting times. —Chinese curse
226

GUA 29, KAN3, EXPOSURE
 
  Binary 010 010 = 18; Kan below, Kan above; Chong Gua
29.X, Overall Image
Water is ever arriving
Repeated exposure
The noble young one, accordingly,
continues in character and conduct
Practicing teaching and serving
The water moves on continuously, filling up the chasms and voids as it moves, ever
ready and reliable, like a stout heart. The little boat is pushed from the shoreline, just
above the rapids. The commitment was made: there is no turning back. The boatman
has narrowed his choices, picked a line through the water and stone. Then he does
what is needed, as though life were at stake. It is not a time to be elsewhere thinking
of options and other places to be. The best time to learn is when the subject is useful
right now. The young noble encounters what lies before him, committed with all of
his heart to the work, rising up to each new challenge. At this edge the will is to live.
29.0, Repeated Exposure
Be true
To keep the heart secure is fulfillment
Advance will have value
The river knows its true path through the canyon. It will know without any question
or doubt. This may be a little too perfect for us to attain, although we can learn to get
closer by putting what gets in the way out of mind, stripping down to bare essentials,
not giving up, not losing heart, accepting the canyon’s stone limits as handholds and
places to stand. There is a great sense of freedom when all of the constraints are so
clearly defined and the choices are simple. Life is starkened and vivified. Exigence
shows the way out, the emergency, an urgency to emerge with a heart still pounding.
This is how to make wishes come true: to give them no other choice. When we can’t
afford to lose faith or heart, necessity makes all the needed connections. This is what
leads to success. We use the situation at hand as though it could not be otherwise.
We call out for reassurance between the canyon walls, but the echoes only mock us.
Good fortune: there is something out there, not a dark and endless void. Exposure
gets the blood pumping, brings out our best and resets the values into right order.
Exposure and risk show the way to the way and attune us  in to optimum channels.
227

29.M, Key Words
Repeated, multiple, familiar with + crisis, risk, hazard, peril, exigency, trial, danger
Pit, chasm, canyon, gorge, strait, test; living on the edge, the way out is through
Immerse, plunge in, undergo, commit, fall to, get involved; fear, vertigo, anxiety
Concentration, alertness, challenge, unarguable constraints, the will to live, heart
Flow, water’s approach to givens, necessity to perform; fluidity, grace, courage
Enlightening confrontations, the hard fact as teacher; Castaneda’s having to believe
29.G, From the Glossary
kan3 (a, the) pit, pitfall, hole, cavity, snare, trap, canyon, chasm, defile, gorge,
depth, precipice, grave, risk, exposure, danger, dangerous position, dangerous
place, crisis, exigency, critical situation; gravity; water necessity (s); (to) trap,
entrap, bury in a pit; (a, the) pit’s, canyon’s, chasm’s, risk’s; (a pun)
29.T, Tuan Zhuan
Repeated exposure
(Means) twice the risk
The water replenishes but does not pile up
Making progress (through) risk yet never losing its confidence
To keep the heart secure (