hinking is not shared by large numbers of people in this
human civilization that we live in. I am often critical of the direction our species is
moving in. Sometimes I thought I might be writing for some unknown future
archaeologists digging through the ruins of our many follies and wanting them to
know that at least some of us were thinking about future generations. In short then,
there may be a lot of material in these commentaries to displease the average reader.
Such readers are herewith advised to either skip over these texts altogether or else to
grit their teeth and just skim them for clues to the meanings of the translated texts.
In the Zhouyi and Da Xiang texts, presented in the larger and boldface type,
the words which do not appear in bold were added to the strictly literal translation to
nudge the understanding along, sometimes to bring out an implied bit of humor and
sometimes to help develop what I thought was the intended meaning. I used this de-
vice as sparingly as I could. This was also 
done in the Tuan Zhuan  and Xiao Xiang
sections, except that I placed these added words in parentheses. The words in italics
in the Tuan Zhuan and Xiao Xiang sections signify t hat these are quotations, refer-
ences in the commentaries to words which were used in the older Zhouyi text found
directly above.
The last page for each of the Gua contains: 1) a listing of several of the key
Wing and Han dimensions, 2) the footnotes for the asterisks in the translation,
3) the corresponding vocabulary elements in three other "counseling languages":
Qabalah (Kabbalah*), Tarot and Astrology, and 4 ) sets of quotations taken from
world literature to illustrate some of the broader ranges of meanings and applica-
tions of the Hexagrams. [Skip ahead to the Key if Item 3 holds no interest for you]
With regard to Item 3, the “Wai Guang” segment (Outside Illustrations or
External Examples) gives cross-references to three other systems from the West and
Middle-East: the Qabalah, Tarot and Astrology. The presence of this segment may
irritate some readers, and the fact that this system of correspondences differs signifi-
cantly from the ones developed by the Golden Dawn and/or Aleister Crowley may
annoy still others. But this is not my problem. I am not meaning to imply any his-
torical or metaphysical connection here, merely simple linguistic parallels, which
perhaps derived from common elements in the human lebenswelt. It is not at all
necessary, in my opinion, to believe in any of these systems any more than you
would believe in a hammer, a dictionary or other tool. It is not necessary for some-
one to think Astrology has anything whatsoever to do with the stars, 
or even planets,
before deriving value from its study. Much can be learned about the human mind
54

from the deeper study of our conceptual systems, apart from any pretense to truth
which might be made by the system's adherents.
This represents the first complete system of inter-translation between all four
of these languages and this is its first time in print. Portions have been published by
the Order of the Golden Dawn and many were later modified by Aleister Crowley.
Many modifications had to be made to these earlier system prior to filling in the
blanks, most notably scrapping the lineal sequence of the Trumps and the Hebrew
alphabet, as they applied to the Paths on the Otz Hhayim or Tree of Life, in favor of
a geometric one which is for the first time consistent with the verbal descriptions
given in the Sepher Yetzirah, Chapter Six. Further, Gen has here been reassigned to
Chesed; Dui to Netzach; Kun and Neptune to Binah; Yang and Kronos to Kether;
and Yin and Pluto (and Gaia) to Malkuth. The system of assignments to the Decans
of the Signs has been replaced by a system using Planets-in-Signs and Sephiroth-
in-Worlds. There is not enough space here for further explanation or apologies, but
note the geometry of these on the Xian Tian grid in Dimensions. This geometry
carries in