ad
fallen from heaven. But they’ll have no value or meaning until they are wanted and
taken, accepted and put to a use. To gain is to learn how to better receive, to take a
gift with gratitude, to honor the gift by wanting what can be done with it. Growth
does not need to mean that size changes: when we learn to unlearn what no longer
serves us, we may even get smaller and better, do more with less and yet hold more
of the world in our grasp. But our job is to give these gains value, and not merely
learn they are there. Options, models, tactics, ideas and tools are all free, except for
the effort of picking them up. Not everything has been thought, said or done yet,
but our records keep getting better, so some of the things we could do, especially
bad ideas, no longer need to be tried. The wise ones will move through their multiple
choices with a healthy self-interest, just as unable as anyone else to give what they
have not first taken. And several whole, wide worlds are out there just for the taking.
305

42.M, Key Words
Extension, diversification, broadening, advantage, empowerment; gain, increase
Enrichment, smiling fortune; enhancements, benefits, gifts, windfalls, gleanings
New access, input, options, choices, alternatives; learning, accepting, growing
Receiving generously, taking well, using the gifts, appreciation, blessings to count
Positional advantage, leverage, purchase; to glean, profit, augment; faring well
Gain also as an increase in sensitivity to signal strength, amplification, expansion
42.G, From the Glossary
yi4 (to) add, advance, augment, benefit, enrich, expand, fill (up), further, gain,
give, grant, grow, increase (by), progress, p romote, profit, reinforce, replenish,
restore, strengthen (to) (s, ed, ing); (a, the) addition, advantage, augmentation,
benefit, enrichment, expansion, gain, gift, grant (of), surplus, ov erflow, increase,
profit, value; (to be) beneficial, gainful, profitable, increased, advantageous, aug-
mented, progressive, restorative, useful; expansive, rich; additionally, more, all
the more, expansively, further, increasingly; more and more
42.T, Tuan Zhuan
Increasing
Decreasing the lofty to increase the humble
The people’s satisfaction is not a limitation
From the lofty down to the humble
Such a course (is) highly exemplary
Worthwhile to have somewhere to go:
Concentration (and) uprightness will be rewarding
Worthwhile to cross the great stream:
The nature of wood leads to progress
Increase moves while adapting
The day’s progress is not a limitation
Heaven confers, the earth brings forth
This increase is without directives
The general increase is that of the way,
Sharing the time (and) moving in union
306

42.1, 1st 9, Zhi Gua 20: Guan, Perspective
(Fan Yao 20.1: childlike perspective, little people blameless)
Worthwhile and productive to perform great deeds
Excellent opportunity
Without errors
42.1x (An) excellent opportunity (to be) without errors:
(To be) humble regardless of weighty concerns
Looking up from nearsighted labor, he finds there is a better way, to do three times
the work with only a third of the effort. The forest full of mighty trees turns out to
be easy to plant: seeds and some water, humility, patience and time. At the bottom
there is yet no great enterprise, it is not the place for greatness, although great things
can begin here. Knowledge is power, but it costs so very little. The vision, the deed,
and the energy used for doing the deed: all these are enabled by power from the sun.
It is to this star that the deed is best dedicated. The light is the power, the author and
glory, not us. Even our notions of greatness might not be all that mature: we seem to
enjoy inflating these things and putting ourselves at the center. Greatness is there for
the asking. But one who thinks himself mighty should try pulling oxcarts around.
42.2, 6 2nd, Zhi Gua 61: Zhong Fu, The Truth Within
(Fan Yao 61.2: call of crane in shadows, her young respond)
Somebody grants one ten matched