ated as a concrete thing. This becomes very common in the Han dynasty
apocryphal works when the structural dimensions of the Yijing, as they appear in
the Wings and later, are taken to be inherent in the construction of the original
Zhouyi, instead of being seen as algorithms invented and applied later. It occurs
in contemporary scholarship in the application of methods such as etymology.
The "rules of etymology" simply do not require someone coining a new word to
refer to the etymology rules book in the assignment of new characters to
meanings and new meanings to old characters. Above all, it does not retroactively
require the ancients to do so. In fact what the makers of the rules are doing is
observing what seems to have happened and making up ideas based on averages
of what has been noticed. Etymology frequently works, maybe more frequently
than not. It even works well enough to suggest strikingly insightful hypotheses.
But it does not work well enough to prove even a single hypothesis. Etymology
is a useful tool, helpful, worthwhile and even fun to use, but it is an inexact set o
f
speculations, not a science. The development of compound characters did not
proceed with as much order as is assumed. Even the idea that characters should
have a radical and a phonetic component begins as in interpretive overlay, not a
fundamental law followed by the original creators of the language. It merely
describes a trend. To make our ideas about reality the very basis of reality is
where Plato went so terribly wrong.
Bifurcation (a.k.a. false dichotomy, false dilemma, excluded middle or the
"black and white" fallacy) occurs where someone presents a situation as having
only two alternatives, where in fact other alternatives exist or might exist. The
unspoken premise is that there are only two choices. This reasoning is weak
because if both claims could be false, then it cannot be inferred that one is true
because the other is false. Bifurcation can closely resemble the Straw Man fallacy.
With this, one oversimplifies and then forces a choice. For example: To a great
extent the reconstruction of the Zhouyi based on the Wings and Han scholarship
has failed. But this does not support or validate the results derived from the more
modern applications of context criticism, etymology or archaeological discovery,
especially when so much of this finally translates as nonsense. There is without a
doubt a vast array of interpretive techniques still uninvented and unapplied here.
There might even be clues to the meaning of the Zhouyi inside the Zhouyi itself.
A subset of bifurcation is the slippery slope fallacy (give an inch and they will
31

take a mile): make any exceptions to the rules governing these methodologies, for
the sake of such vague ideas as meaning, and the entire edifice will collapse. And
never, ever let them hear you say "I don't know."
If I were to assert that the weight of three thousand years of interpretive
tradition clinging to the Zhouyi meant that its conclusions were no longer to be
questioned, this would be argumentum ad antiquitatem , appeal to antiquity. I am,
however, arguing that at least some of this tradition carries enough weight to
warrant a demand for more burden of proof. The opposite of this fallacy is
argumentum a d novitatem,  the appeal to modernity, the fallacy of asserting that
something is more correct simply because it is new or newer than something else.
This notion is even carried as a coat of arms by the Modernists. But this is not the
kind of banner one wants to carry alone - this would feel too much like walking
naked down the street. As a consequence, this fallacy will often be seen along
with argumentum ad verecundiam , an appeal to an authority, which will use
admiration of a famous person to try and win support for an assertion, copious
footnotes and emphasis on the years of experience or the formal degrees held by
the individual making a specific claim. This combination will tend to build
moment