es he’ll go too far.
439

64.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 50: Ding, The Cauldron
(Fan Yao 50.3: cauldron’s ears altered, its function is impaired)
If not yet across, to go boldly has pitfalls
It is worthwhile to cross the great stream
64.3x (If) not yet across, to go boldly has pitfalls:
The position is not appropriate
He makes some remarkable progress as he hurries towards home and completion.
But as soon as he reaches the crossing, things begin to go sideways. It would seem
that the ferryman is not in as much of a hurry, and he likes to tease those who are.
First reactions have made bad first impressions. The ferryman now does not like our
traveler’s attitude, and flatly refuses to take him across. It is tempting here to make
the ferryman ford the stream lengthways, but this will not contribute to progress, or
to getting across: there are laws against such things. Our homeward bound traveler
might as well take his anger aside, along with his axe and some rope, and then build
himself a small raft. Frustration is impractical, so he gets a grip and handles things
better. Good ideas are the ones which work. Once across he can send gestures back.
64.4, 9 4th, Zhi Gua 04: Meng, Inexperience
(Fan Yao 04.4: afflicted by ignorance, a shame)
Persistence is promising while regrets pass
Force was spent to subjugate the barbarian country
Though three years brought rewards of great domains
64.4x Persistence (is) promising (while) regrets pass:
The objectives (are) carried out
Not yet done with the forces of wrong, he steels his heart and wades into hell. What
does he get himself into? Three long years of battle against the Gui Fang. He will
turn himself into a weapon of war, so that any kindness will look like a tactic, any
mistake like a ploy. To advance means to put things aside and behind him, including
all thoughts of his home life. Three years of resolve will wrest order from the chaos,
although every day new lands will be claimed. His final reward is the conquest, and
the fitness this brings, and maybe even some lessons to spread about fighting, both
with and against more competent warriors. But his final demon to conquer will be
this foreign state of mind, no more n ative to him than the northern barbarians are
to his homeland. Neither completion nor peace are found by the end of this battle.
440

64.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 06: Song, Contention
(Fan Yao 06.5: the contest is most promising)
Persistence is promising
Despite the regrets
The noble young one moves toward the light of example
Holding true
Promising
64.5x The noble young one moves toward the light of example:
The brightness (is) promising
Times of transition can feel quite foreign or strange, as when the fire run wild has
cleared the ground for new growth. This will not seem like much of a garden now.
The thorns are the first to take over, to hold their ground for the weeds next to come.
The careless get stuck and blood is shed. But the weeds taking root are as green as
the plants of tomorrow. The time now begins to bear witness, the change foreseen
starts to come into view, at least to those with more than one single season of vision.
The wise one might seem self-absorbed, with eyes that look too far beyond, or too
closely, as if picking the present apart. But that helpful light up ahead will be his.
We are but bridges for those who come after. And many have come before us, and
charted some of the ways changes go. Their examples serve as provisional truths.
64.6, Top 9, Zhi Gua 40: Jie, Release
(Fan Yao 40.6: the duke takes aim at raptor high on battlement)
Being confident on top of drinking wine
Not wrong
But to soak one’s own head,
Even with truth, is truly to lose it
64.6x Drinking wine (and) soaking the head:
Truly without comprehending the limits
The long transition is practically over and the vigilant want to relax. They are merely
nearing completion, but already the big celebration begins. The heady wine is passed
freely about in the tavern, in a confident celebration. There is no