yet. There are plenty of things to do
while he waits, a pleasant journey made from walking to and fro, thousands of steps
without leaving his mind, thrills to be had in counting up heartbeats: this too can be
grand adventure. Limits look best when outside them are only bad ideas. Naturally
water likes to keep moving and it will offer resistance to anything blocking its flow.
Pressure to go will build in its time. There will be signs to open the doors and gates.
60.2, 9 2nd, Zhi Gua 03: Zhun, Rallying
Fan Yao 03.2: ready suitor to wait ten years for young lady
Not going past the gate from the courtyard*
Disappointing
60.2x Not going past the gate (from) the courtyard
 (is) disappointing:
Losing the crucial timing
He is already outside the door, and sneaking a peek at the street from his courtyard.
Still he is thinking and doubting too much. What are the ramifications? This street
seems to go off in two directions at once. What if he goes the wrong way? Fearing
no more than a possible error, he wraps himself up in anxious hesitation. The time is
certainly more advanced than he is. His big chance will claw only once at this gate
and depart with a snort of disgust. The private space of his courtyard might be seen
any number of ways: as sanctuary and refuge, a place to get himself ready, a point of
departure, or a place in which to be vulnerable, where his sheltered, timid life can be
threatened and teased. Many choices exist in his mind, but there’s only one way he
will go. Paradise is a walled-in garden as well: will he be climbing these walls soon?
415

60.3, 6 3rd, Zhi Gua 05: Xu, Anticipation
(Fan Yao 05.3: waiting in mud, inviting predators to approach)
Such a lack of restraint
And therefore such lament
Not a mistake
60.3x Lack of restraint comes to lament:
Given this, who is to blame?
Lament is not a mistake here. His conscience is right: he has been a bit of a swine.
Wanting to see no connection between freedoms and limitations, extending himself
and expanding his options in every direction at once, he finds himself swamped in
the consequences, his sacrament profaned, with no zest left for flexing those infinite
freedoms. The most compelling argument for liberty’s free exercise is to be found
in the way it instructs, in being able to blame nobody but yourself. Lament can be
the beginning of a recovery, although sometimes a beginning can last several years.
Priorities and values are subject to disease, but few investigate here. Crowds do not
gather to stare at the wino; thieves know how much he is worth. Even the ones who
love to cast blame pass by, trying not to look. This scene is rich in lessons on limits.
60.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 58: Dui, Satisfaction
(Fan Yao 58.4: measured joy is less than serene, limit anxiety)
Content with the boundaries
Fulfillment
60.4x Contentment with boundaries comes to fulfillment:
Undertaking a higher path
His limits are easy and natural, and they help to define his freedoms. What fails to
bring him happiness, maybe following one second chance, he simply leaves behind.
What does, he enjoys and then leave this behind as well, until it comes around again.
Heaven is easy to get to: it begins where the earth ends, right at our feet. The sage
goes there just by filling his belly. His being needs no coaxing to digest his meals.
Hell is the difficult way to go, to be always somewhere else, split into one part which
gives commands and another which must disobey. Excellent first limitations to have
are to be finite and to know just where we stand. To be fulfilled here is the first real
freedom. If we cannot have it all anyway, then resenting not getting too much is only
distraction from all that remains. Ask what is the life we are best adapted to living.
416

60.5, 9 5th, Zhi Gua 19: Lin, Taking Charge
(Fan Yao 19.5: informed commitment, a great noble’s necessity)
Sweet limitations
Promising
To continue has merit
60.5x Sweet limitation holds promise:
Occupying a place in the center
The master’s rules are