the Xi Ci Zhuan , or the Commentary on the Appended Phrases. It is
widely claimed that this text m arked the beginning of real philosophy in China.
If this is true, then another name must be found for the kind of thought which the
Zhouyi represents, to distinguish this clearly from the tautological pseudo-reality,
the mistaking of the map for the terrain, and the hyperbolic exaggeration found
throughout the Xi Ci Zhuan. These two Wings are not translated here. Rather,
they have been mined for their higher grade ore. All of the Chinese words and
glosses which are used in the Xi Ci Zhuan to 
describe the Hexagrams, Trigrams,
Images and Lines, as well as the Six Places, have been excerpted here and placed
at the end of each Gua in the Matrix, the Glosses sections of the Xiao Gua, and
the Yao Wei or the Line Position section of Dimensions. Readers who wish to see
what has been left out here, and perhaps to understand why, may find several
adequate translations among those Bibliography entries which are highlighted in
bold.
The 7th Wing is composed of five sets of text which expound on the first
two Gua. This collection is known as the Wen Yan Zhuan, or Commentary on the
Words of the Text. The first set comments on both the Gua Ci  and the seven Yao
Ci of Creating ( Qian); the second and third, only on the seven Yao Ci  of Qian;
the fourth, on the Gua Ci  and the first six Yao Ci  of Qian; and the fifth, on the
Gua Ci and first six Yao Ci  of Accepting ( Kun). [The first and second Gua have
an extra Yao Ci  text]. It is not known whether this Wing is a fragment of a much
larger commentary or is simply a “starter kit” to orient readers to a few methods
of interpretation. Some of the text is prefaced by zi yue, “The Master Said:”, the
signature of a Confucian school. This Wing is not translated here, but some of the
comments on the Yao Ci, on both Qian and Kun, added insights and were worth
quoting. These quotations may be found at the end of each of the first two Gua in
the Matrix, and one quote is translated in D
imensions, under Yao Wei , or Line
Position. As with the Xi Ci Zhuan , several translations of the complete text may
be found in other English versions.
The 8th Wing is a treatise on the properties of ten of the Xiao Xiang or the
Small Symbols: the Er Yao, or Two Lines, and the Ba Gua, or Eight T rigrams. The
Si Xiang, or Four Emblems, are not discussed. This Wing is known as the Shuo
Gua, or the Explanation of the Diagrams. The received text contains a few errors,
at least one of transposition and one of omission, with regard to the Ba Gua. And
500

several of the properties which are here assigned to the Ba Gua are without much
use to the understanding. W hile this text in not translated in full here, all of the
terms used to gloss or describe the small symbols have been excerpted from this
text, sorted by their symbols and placed into the Glosses sections of Xiao Gua, the
Small Symbols. This is at least the meat of the text without the fat, or the nuts
without the shells.
The 9th Wing is a brisk tour through the sequence of the Gua, attempting to
both explain and ju stify the book’s chapter sequence, known as the Hou Tian
(Later Heaven), or Wen Wang  (King Wen) arrangement. This Wing is known as
the Xu Gua  or the Sequence of the Hexagrams. Exactly half of the arrangement
this describes is structurally meaningful: the pairs 1-2, 3-4, etc.; the other half is
structurally meaningless: the pairs 2-3, 4-5, etc. (that is, the meaningful pairs are
placed in random order). Consequently, this Wing is on its most certain ground
half of the time, while stretching itself in the other half. But even when stretching
it reaches a few useful insights. Again, all of the relevant terms used here have
been excerpted and sorted for use as glosses. These will be found in the Matrix, at
the end of each of the Gua.
The 10th and final Wing is a quick review of the 32 structurally meaningful
pairs, as one of the pair contrasts with the other.