d even self-correct the corresponding multitude of
errors. The Yijing’s structure is its negative entropy, its means of self-rectification and
5

continuance (heng) regardless of the non-viable mutations and freaks (which our atomic era
is so full of). The book can introduce itself to archaeologists. It can carry itself through both
overgrowth and overpruning.
Perhaps our unfamiliarity with the language model stems from comparison with our
more familiar spoken languages, which tend to develop more spontaneously and to develop
grammatical structures which are largely subliminal until studied in retrospect. But there
exists a number of close examples of other, consciously designed languages which also tend
to exhibit finitude of vocabulary, economy of structure and mathematical symmetry. The
most familiar of these is mathematics itself. Chemistry, with its periodic table of elements, is
another. Music is such a language. And so too are the Yijing’s distant cousins: Qabalah,
Tarot, Astrology, Alchemy, etc. to which the linguistic model (to this scowler at least) is
vastly more appropriate (and more useful in counseling) than the metaphysical models.
It is within the individual patterns, usually as matrix grids which chart the dimensions
(morphology) of each part of speech, where lies the dimension of Correlative Thought
which Needham, Shchutskii, Fendos and others speak of. The dimensions of the matrix
grids are the Numbers, the Shu of Xiang Shu, the Scales discussed at some length in Xiao
Gua, the Small Symbols. For example, the Signs of western Astrology are in part or in one
dimension functions of the multiplication of the Three Qual ities (Cardinal, Fixed and
Mutable) by the Four Elements (Fire, Earth, Air and Water) so that each of the twelve
represents a unique combination in this matrix and all combinations are exhausted. The
eight-by-eight Ba Gong grids of the Yi’s Xian Tian and other, more original arrangements
are similarly exhaustive matrices. These grids are used as templates, which we then
superimpose onto the subjects of our various investigations, or whatever we would like t
o
think of as reality. Think now of Carl Jung’s “mission of psychology” to map and reclaim
territory from the unconscious mind. The grid has become the system of latitudes and
longitudes with which we chart this terrain and draw our maps. We also have choices here
in the grids we use. We need only to substitute scales to see yet another aspect of the
terrain, much as geology maps give us one kind of data and topographic maps another. Or,
more suited to our mental dimension, the same equation in analytic geometry can often be
graphed using ei ther rectangular or polar coordinates and this process will offer quite
different pictures of our object of inquiry. This also helps to remind us that the map is a tool
and not the terrain.
Needham had few reservations about expressing the shortcomings of the Yijing’s
particular matrices when it came to the applied physical sciences: the Periodic Table was a
much more useful matrix for making things happen. But he was ultimately just pointing out
the error of the Chinese heirs to the Yijing in mistaking this document for a physical and
metaphysical model. He called these Xiang Shu busybodies mutationists. Others have said
numerologists. The picture changes completely when we look at the Yi as a philosophy and
a psychology and the subjects of investigation become the human mind, the human attitude
and the human experience.
Recall now the Scales discussed in Xiao Gua, and that these Scales are tested across
time for both their relevance to and resonance with the human experience. They do not
survive if
 they fail these tests. It is these tested Scales which become the sides or the
dimensions of the matrix. These are developed prior to the matrix itself, and in their
development accrue associations or correspondences which span a wide range of fields of
6

inquiry. For example, the Greek Elements of Fire, Eart