the proper education and training of the heirs to
political power.
Some of the dictionaries on divination:
Webster's: 1) The practice of determining the hidden significance or cause of
events, sometimes foretelling the future, by various natural, psychological, and
4

other techniques. 2. An indication of what is future or secret; augury omen;
conjectural presage; prediction.
American Heritage : 1. The art or act of foretelling future events or revealing
occult knowledge by means of augury or an alleged supernatural agency. 2. An
inspired guess or presentiment. 3. Something that has been divined.
Encyclopedic Theosophical Glossary: The art of obtaining hidden knowledge
by the aid of ... spiritual beings ... . Often it is a means of utilizing one's own inner
faculties, whether by natural or induced clairvoyance, or by employing the
agencies which regulate events apparently casual such as the fall of the cards, the
marks in the sand, the drawing of lots; and this last is related to the subject of
omens ... . The universal correspondences in nature, the interrelation of all things,
imply that the most apparently casual and trivial events have of necessity
connection with other events, so that the one can be interpreted by means of the
other, provided only that the diviner knows the rules and has the insight and skill
... . It is evident, however, that the condition and capacities of the diviner play an
essential part in the success of the operation.
Catholic Encyclopedia: (Oh, why not?) From a theological standpoint divination
supposes the existence of devils who have great natural powers and who,
actuated by jealousy of man and hatred of God, ever seek to lessen His glory and
to draw man into perdition, or at least to injure him bodily, mentally, and
spiritually. Divination is not, as we have seen, foretelling what comes from
necessity or what generally happens, or foretelling what God reveals or what can
be discovered by human effort, but it is the usurpation of knowledge of the
future, i.e. arriving at it by inadequate or improper means. This knowledge is a
prerogative of Divinity and so the usurper is said to divine.
Who are the Spirits in question? Apparently, by the founding of the Zhou
they are a mix of royal ancestors, cultural heroes and nature deities, all somehow
subordinated in a matrix called Di or Shang Di, which the missionaries are eager to
translate as God, or Lord on High. For Shang Di I have adopted the less theistic
phrase "highest divinity," which does not need to imply volition or personality.
This in turn, when viewed as the highest order of things, is called Tian or Heaven.
This Heaven is not all that transcendent - you can see much of it if you look up at
night. As the Chinese culture moved from the Shang into the Zhou, the powers,
activities and functions of the spirits evolved as well. Divination was gradually
moving away from prediction and verification, through the sp irits' approval and
reprimand, and gradually into guidance by good example and inspiration. Choice
entered the field. Questions gradually moved from 'what w ill' and 'should we' to
'how may' and 'why not.' There even came to be spells: 'we desire that ... .' The
mode of operation of the spirits and ancestors gradually became inspirational, the
setting of inspiring examples in the living of meritorious lives. This then became
an ethic for the ancestors-to-be who were still alive.
The milfoil or yarrow stalk method of divination, for which the  Zhouyi  was
written, was developed alongside and not in place 
of the older methods that used
bone and shell. It may be that from the start its use was not strictly the sort of
5

royal prerogative that bone and shell were. Allowing for a somewhat broader
class of users, such as a gradual expansion into the inner court and the highest of
the noble households, would go a long way towards explaining the broader
subject matter the Zhouyi seems to try to encompass. In any event, any theory of
author int