promise: 
Compliantly using the givens 
He is caught in a trap set for those with less power and light, and wounded in the left  
thigh. This is more an annoyance than fatal, and note that he’s suffered no wound to  
his head. He can even use the event to help turn the thing around. He now possesses  
a limp to assist his disguise, pain to help with his purpose and a slightly used trap  
as well. Unlike with your arms, you can’t always think of your left leg as the spare. 
And this gets him thinking about some sort of prosthesis, like that horse over there  
in the shadows, who needs something useful to do. Suddenly he finds himself with  
twice the speed and five times the strength as before, and committed now to a new  
Plan B with ten times the promise of A. This is a function of balance and using all  
that circumstance offers. The center of the middle path is closest to all the options. 
271

36.3, 9 3rd, Zhi Gua 24: Fu, Returning
(Fan Yao 24.3: repeated returns, difficulty, but no blame)
Brightness obscured on the southern winter hunt
Capturing the others’ great leader
This is not a call for a hasty resolution
36.3x The southern winter hunt has a purpose
After this (is fulfilled), a great gain
He takes his troops south in the winter to hunt. This is a practice with multiple uses,
for training and exercise, not merely for food. But returning at night to those snares
he has set, he finds the chief of his foes in the trap, hung upside down and thrashing
most furiously, trying to cast some pretty black spells. Such was the good of being
so stealthy. But this was no omen from heaven: only a stroke of great luck and not
divine justice. Wisdom will not leap from here to exuberance: it might yet restore the
darkness and mystery, instead of announcing the news. Great feuds are built up on
multiple causes. The dark one still has some pretty mean allies, who might not take
this news very well. Best to keep them confused and in darkness, control the light,
and then pick them off one at a time. He can still use all that resolve he was saving.
36.4, 6 4th, Zhi Gua 55: Feng, Abundance
(Fan Yao 55.4: abundant screens, finding their hidden leader)
Entering through the left side of the gut
Capturing intelligence of the dark one’s heart
Before exiting through the courtyard gate
36.4x Entering through the left side of the gut:
To capture the heart’s intentions
Learning a password or two, he sneaks into the dark one’s encampment, nearing the
tent where decisions are made. He sees the tyrant in action, learning of his motives
and secret designs. Exploring this dark body politic, deep in the belly of the beast,
he studies the heart of the matter, watching the damned thing pumping cold blood,
looking for ways to stop it from beating. This is half of the mission, but information
will do him no good if he fails to carry this out. However good his intelligence is,
if it doesn’t survive it is just as useless as ignorance. Between cloaks and daggers,
cloaks are the greater weapons. In the same way that silence can win a debate, or an
open hand do more damage than fists, the fleet, silent feet are the best weapon now.
The walls protect him, their hiddenness hides him. He can walk right out the gate.
272

36.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 63: Ji Ji, Already Complete
(Fan Yao 63.5: big cattle or modest sacrifice, genuine gains)
Prince Ji held his brightness obscured*
Persistence was rewarded
36.5x Prince Ji’s persistence:
A light not accepting extinction
The minister watches as his sovereign transforms, from a weak man into a monster.
Related by blood to the tyrant, a slave in his own noble house, Jizi might have had
no other choice but to feign an incurable madness, assuming that to end his own life
was no option, wanting to keep what he believed in alive. One suspects this might be
the way of most madness, whether it has or is method: its aim is to keep a life going,
to keep the embers alive. Mind has become the lower priority. If sanity means being
responsible,