the Confucian
world. The Han sovereigns were hungry for advice about the combination of
sovereignty and wisdom. Wen Di (r. 179-157) tried in earnest to become a model
sovereign in the Confucian i mage. The Han, though begun by a man who rose
from the ranks of peasantry, had seen a brief, failed reintr oduction of feudalism.
This was replaced by the Examination System, introduced by Wu Di (r. 140-87).
Here, for the first time, a youth from any class or station could be accepted into
the circles of political power and influence simply on the basis of intellectual
516

potential and ethical merit, and he could rise to the highest ranks, including that
of emperor. Although the Zhouyi had for centuries advocated me ritocracy and, at
a minimum, recommended that a sovereign surround the throne with m erit, ability
and talent from below, the implementation of this in reality was only partially and
intermittently achieved in the Zhou. Now, there remained only the big question of
who graded the examinees, and according to what ideas and standards. No single
step was a leap to the end.
In 168 BCE, a box of texts was placed in a tomb at what is now Mawangdui
in Hunan. These texts were written in ink on silk, and, though carefully folded,
suffered damage at the folds. The box contained two ve rsions of Laozi’s Daode
Jing and one version of the Yijing, with commentary. They were discovered in
1973, excavated in 1976, and made public in the 1980’s. All three of these texts
differ in content (both vocabulary and written characters) and chapter sequence
from the versions which have come down to us over the years and above ground,
which are often termed the received texts. The M awangdui texts are older by
about three centuries than those upon which our received texts are based. T here
is likely to be a great flurry of work on these texts, and much made of the many
differences in content. The Yi text may be found in both Kunst (in Chinese) and
in Shaughnessy (in Chinese and English). My own inclination, which is based in
part on the many differences between the two Mawangdui Laozi texts, and in
part on having been a contributing Yixue scholar who would like his humble
contribution to survive his death, is to think of the Mawangdui Yijing text as the
creative contribution of an individual (or a group), who took a great deal of
creative license in the years following the Qin disaster, and great pains to see that
it survived through burial. It is not to automatically think that this text must be
the most authentic version simply because it is older. A day might come when a
text much like the Mawangwdui version is unearthed. But until then, when I see
this one-of-a-kind artifact taken seriously enough to "justify" e mending the
received text, I am likely t
o imagine archaeologists ten thousand years from now
digging up copies of Diane Stein's I Ching for Angry Lesbians or maybe J oseph
Murphy's I Ching That Cannot Leave the Bible. The Yi, after all, has inspired a
lot of idiosyncratic versions. Thirty-two of the sixty-four Gua Ming, or Hexagram
Names, differ in the Mawangdui text. These are treated here as additional glosses
on the received Gua Ming , and translated in the Notes section of the Matrix.
The reign of Wu Di was also home to an important and influential Confucian
named Dong Zhongshu (179-104). Dong is credited first with a fuller integration
of the Yin-Yang philosophy into Confucianism, and then with the incorporation
of the cosmological ideas found in the Yi’s ten Wings. The Er Yao, Si Xiang  and
Ba Gua at last became parts of the larger system. Meanwhile, Confucianism was
incorporating a number of other doctrines. In 136, Dong convinced Wu Di to
adopt this synthesis, in the name of its Confucian umbrella, as the official and
orthodox system of philosophy. Fung Yulan calls this the biggest turning point in
the history of Chinese philosophy and divides his treatise here, between the
Period of the Philosophers and that of the Classical