le away. Plus you have their shoes.
Most humor, whether rude and crude or refined and witty, seems to have
two key ingredients: 1) a buildup of something that might be called an emotional
charge, which is released suddenly into nowhere; and 2) the juxtaposition of two
frames of reference which are worlds apart, with the humoree's attention being
jerked suddenly from one to the other.
The source of the emotional charge that humor makes use of is often
something much less than noble: aggression, apprehension, fear, xenophobia,
racism, sexism, revulsion at deformity, negative or anti-sympathy, and so on. The
use of laughter, of course, goes way back in primitive society in its use as a
corrective social force, as a precursor to shame. You don't see much of this malice
in the Yi, but it may be that the frequency of malice in humor in general is the
source of so much reluctance to perceive humor as a device used by the Zhouyi
authors. In contrast, the emotional charge here, as it is in the teaching stories of
Daoism, Zen and Sufism, seems to use more of the reader's hope, expectation and
anticipation, and to rely heavily on the respect and reverence that the tradition 
is
accorded. The current theories of humor, of which Arthur Koestler is the best
known author, suggest that the process of humor involves emotion and intellect
traveling a while down the same track or line of reasoning. The intellect is then
made to jump suddenly and unexpectedly onto a different track, leaving emotion,
with its greater inertia or slower response to change, derailed with nowhere to go
and nothing to do but go Blooey.
The frames of reference, lines of reasoning or tracks to jump can come from
any two worlds which are unrelated and have their own sets of internal logic,
assumptions and rules. The two can be literary vs literal (walk a mile in their
shoes), one meaning vs another meaning (take my wife, please), general vs
specific (that was no lady, that was my wife), mental vs physical, specialized vs
common, sacred vs secular, trivial vs exalted, conscious vs automatic, part vs
whole, mental vs material, and so on. The simplest form, the pun, plays on the
homonym or polysemy, the assignment of two different meanings to the same
word or sound. The Yi seems to have much of this - the polysemous nature of the
Chinese language would, I suspect, make this play irresistible. Much of this, of
course, would be lost to us, lost on us, and even lost on the later Chinese scholars.
Some we can infer, like plays on  Yi as Change, Easy and an ancient place name.
And some seem to carry between Chinese and English because they are the same
puns in both languages and both cultures.
551

But the notion of cultural differences brings up a much bigger problem. As
Koestler says, "Humor thrives only in its native climate, embedded in its native
logic; when one does not know what to expect, one cannot be cheated of one's
expectations." In other words, if one of the two juxtaposed frames of reference is
missing (or hard to reach, or poorly understood) in the cultural repertoire of the
hearer, both sides of the joke are lost. You could see how the mere existence of
cultural differences could be used to avoid looking for humor altogether. Even
the Chinese people do not exactly live in the Zhouyi's native climate. But look at
this statement closer: only in its native climate. This is oversimplified and there is a
much broader spectrum here. In its narrowest sense this points to the difficulty of
a native of rural Minnesota in "getting" a New Yorker's urban humor. A little
broader might be the difficulty that an American television viewer has in laughing
at a BBC comedy special. Then there is my own most embarrassing difficulty with
understanding sophisticated puns in Swahili. But there is also a sense in which
"native climate" can refer to the broader realms of human experience, and I have
already made my prejudices known regarding this issue - that technology and
complex cultu