o err on caution’s side? Or is it best to
step forward with candor and boldness? If you step forward and tell it just like it is,
might you not learn a bit sooner whether or not you were wrong? When the rabbit
stops to consider himself, the hawk makes a mess of his plans, but when he cowers
in fear of the hawk he starves. So rabbits who live to make more of their kind will
hop along in the middle. The same applies here. Between  a humble silence and all
of the things you can say, a middle way will use a plus and a minus to better effect:
speaking simply and true, to the point, to the king, to complete strangers. Modesty
and candor are learning tools, on learning curves, taking little for granted, making
few assumptions, but above all, asking questions and honoring others where due.
146

15.5, 6 5th, Zhi Gua 39: Jian, Impasse
(Fan Yao 39.5: at a major impasse, companions appear)
No enrichment by way of these neighbors
Worthwhile and useful to occupy and subjugate*
Nothing cannot be turned to advantage
15.5x Worthwhile (and) useful to occupy (and) subjugate:
To expedite without permission
Some serious trouble has come and gone and your good for nothing neighbors just
sat by, doing nothing to help. What is a modest and authentic sovereign to do here?
What right might you have to step in and alter their ways? What foundation might
you have to assume that you are superior, that you know what is best for the others?
How could this conquest be modesty? To show t hem good taste by grabbing their
hair and rubbing their faces into your own fine cooking? And do it all for the good
of the conquered? Are not the criteria relative? You already know from recent events
that these folks are not your true friends. To act on good information is not the same
as to act on a presumption. Is it enough to know that you have waited this long and
examined all these questions? Is it now time for them to learn who their friends are?
15.6, Top 6, Zhi Gua 52: Gen, Stillness
(Fan Yao 52.6: authentic stillness is promising)
Expressing modesty
Worthwhile and useful to mobilize the reserves
To discipline home town and province
15.6x Expressive modesty:
The goals (are) not yet achieved
* An appropriate practice to mobilize the reserves
To discipline home town (and) province
Modesty gets big ideas and even a little ambition. Modesty takes command and it
might even make a conquest. One need not be limp to be humble, or passive to be
retiring, merely in earnest and honest. Modesty can express itself as often as any
old rooster might do. Modesty can set armies marching as often as arrogance can,
it can seize the reins of power as often as greed. The difference is due regard, and
the good aim of good means to good ends. This means to begin with the failures
and flaws all your own and the problems you have on the home front. Hypocrisy
is immodest and it cannot lead by example. To conq uer their own worst enemies
is too much of a battle for most, so they must find their enemies elsewhere, or they
fabricate some where none can be found. Fixing yourself is extremely ambitious.
147

15, Dimensions
pang tong gua (opposite): 10, Lu, Respectful Conduct
qian gua (inverse): 16, Yu, Readiness
jiao gua (reverse): 23, Bo, Decomposing
hu gua (nuclear): 40, Jie, Release
shi er di zhi (12 branches): Gen-Dui Family
15, Notes
* 15.0 The rendering of qian as ‘humility’ is misleading. This subject is better
covered in Gua 62. This has little to do with the practice of self-effacement, which
is more often than not inauthentic. Qian is to know things as they are, even if they
are great. The Gua Ci and Yao C i are more emphatic about this than the Wings,
which under Confucian influence might favor underestimation rather than the
precise assessment that the Zhou Yi is recommending.
* 15.X This means something entirely different from a more usual translation of
"weighing things and making them equal." This "handicapping" would actually be
to appraise things falsely.
* 15.5 It was interstate