ent [#4] Its father is the Sun and its mother
the Moon he meant their male and their female. They are the two birds which are linked together in the
pictures given regarding the beginning of the operation, and from them the spiritual tinctures are produced.
And similarly they are at the end of the operation. Later in his statement [#7 ?] the subtle is more honourable
than the gross, he means by the subtle the divine spiritual water; and by the gross the earthly body. As for his
later statement [#8] with gentleness and wisdom it will ascend from the earth to the sky, and will take fire
from the higher lights, he means by this the distillation and the raising of the water into the air. As for his
later statement [#8a] It will descend to the earth, containing the strength of the high and the low, he means by
this the breathing in (istinshaq) of the air, and the taking of the spirit from it, and its subsequent elevation to
the highest degree of heat, and it is the Fire, and the low is the body, and its content of the controlling earthly
power which imparts the colours. For there lie in it those higher powers, as well as the earthly powers which
were submerged in it.
The natural operation and decay causes it to be manifest, and hence the strength of the earth, and of the air,
and of the higher fire passed in to it. Later he said [#9] it will overcome the high and the low because it in it is
found the light of lights: and consequently the darkness will flee from it. [See Stapleton et al. p 74, 81.]
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
A COMMENTARY OF IBN UMAIL 17

APPENDIX
Translation from Roger Bacon's edition of Secretum Secretorum made c 1445
1)Trouth hath hym so, and it is no doubt,
2) that the lover is to the heigher, and the heigher to the lower aunsweren.
The worcher forsoth of all myracles is the one and sool God, of and fro Whom Cometh all meruelous
operacions.
3) So all thynges were created of o soole substance, and of o soole disposicion,
4 ) the fader wherof is the sone, and the moone moder,
5) that brought hym forth by blast or aier in the wombe, the erthe taken fro it,
6) to whom is seid the increat fader, tresour of myracles, and yever of vertues.
7) Of fire is made erthe.
7a) Depart the erthe fro the fire, for the sotiller is worthier than the more grosse, and the thynne thynge than
the thik. This most be do wisely and discretly.
8) It ascendith fro the erth into the heven, and falleth fro heven to the erthe, and therof sleith the higher and
the lower vertue.
9)And yf it lordship in the lower and in the heigher, and thow shalt lordship aboue and beneth, which forsoth
is the light of lightes, and therfor fro the wolle fle all derknesse.
10) The higher vertue ouer−cometh all, for sothe all thynne thyng doth in dense thynges.
11a) After the disposicion of the more world rynneth this worchyng.
13) And for this prophetisyng of the trynyte of God Hermogenes it called Triplex, trebil in philosophie, as
Aristotle seith.
[See Manzalaoui 1977: 65 −6.]
Translation of same source, made c. 1485.
1) The trwthe is so, and that it is no dowght,
2) that lower thyngis to hyer thyng, and hyer to lower be correspondent. But the Werker of myraclis is on
Godde alone, fro Home descendyth euiry meruulus werk.
3)And so alle thyngis be creat of one only substauns, be an only dysposicion,
4) of home the fadyr is the sonne, and the mone the modyr,
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
APPENDIX 18

5 ) qwyche bar her be the wedyr in the wombe. The erthe is priuyd fro her−to.
6 )This is clepyd or seyd the fadyr of enchauntmentis, tresur of myracclys, the yessuer of vertuys.
7) Be a lytil it is made erthe.
7a) Depart that qwyche is erthly fro that qwyche is fi Fry, for that qwyche is sotel is mor wurthy han that
qwyche is grose, and that rar, porous, or lyght, is mor bettyr than qwiche is thyk of substauns. This is done
wyseli or dyscretly.
8) It ascendyth fro the erth in−to heuyn and fallyth fro heuyn in−to erth, and ther−of it sleth the ouyr vertu
and the nedy