e world− and beyond this man of abject fate may have nothing further.
10)This thing itself presently comes forth stronger by reasons of this fortitude: it subdues all bodies surely,
whether tenuous or solid, by penetrating them.
11a) And so everything whatsoever that the world contains was created.
12) Hence admirable works are accomplished which are instituted (carried out− instituuntur) according to the
same mode.
13) To me therefor the name of Hermes Trismegistus has been awarded because I am discovered as the
Teacher of the three parts of the wisdom of the world.
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
Translation from Kriegsmann (?)  alledgedly from the Phoenician 6

14) These then are the considerations which I have concluded ought to be written down concerning the
readiest operations of the Chymic art.
[Davis 1926: 875 slightly modified.]
From Sigismund Bacstrom (allegedly translated from Chaldean).
0) The Secret Works of CHIRAM ONE in essence, but three in aspect.
1) It is true, no lie, certain and to be depended upon,
2) the superior agrees with the inferior, and the inferior agrees with the superior, to effect that one truly
wonderful work.
3) As all things owe their existence to the will of the only one, so all things owe their origin to the one only
thing, the most hidden by the arrangement of the only God.
4) The father of that one only thing is the sun its mother is the moon,
5) the wind carries it in its belly; but its nourse is a spirituous earth.
6) That one only thing is the father of all things in the Universe.
6a) Its power is perfect,
7) after it has been united with a spirituous earth.
7a) Separate that spirituous earth from the dense or crude by means of a gentle heat, with much attention.
8) In great measure it ascends from the earth up to heaven, and descends again, newborn, on the earth, and
the superior and the inferior are increased in power.
9) By this wilt thou partake of the honours of the whole world. And Darkness will fly from thee.
10) This is the strength of all powers. With this thou wilt be able to overcome all things and transmute all
what is fine and what is coarse.
11a) In this manner the world was created;
12) the arrangements to follow this road are hidden.
13) For this reason I am called Chiram Telat Mechasot, one in essence, but three in aspect. In this trinity is
hidden the wisdom of the whole world.
14) It is ended now, what I have said concerning the effects of the sun. Finish of the Tabula Smaragdina.
[See Hall 1977: CLVIII,]
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
From Sigismund Bacstrom (allegedly  translated from Chaldean). 7

From Madame Blavatsky
2) What is below is like that which is above, and what is above is similar to that which is below to
accomplish the wonders of the one thing.
3) As all things were produced by the mediation of one being, so all things were produced from this one by
adaption.
4) Its father is the sun, its mother the moon.
6a) It is the cause of all perfection throughout the whole earth.
7) Its power is perfect if it is changed into earth.
7a) Separate the earth from the fire, the subtile from the gross, acting prudently and with judgement.
8 ) Ascend with the greatest sagacity from earth to heaven, and unite together the power of things inferior and
superior;
9) thus you will possess the light of the whole world, and all obscurity will fly away from you.
10) This thing has more fortitude than fortitude itself, because it will overcome every subtile thing and
penetrate every solid thing.
11a) By it the world was formed.
[Blavatsky 1972: 507.]
From Fulcanelli (translated from the French by Sieveking)
1) This is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth:−
2) As below, so above; and as above so below. With this knowledge alone you may work miracles.
3) And since all things exist in and eminate from the ONE Who is the ultimate Cause, so all things are born
after their kind from this ONE.
4) The Sun is the father, the Moon the mother;
5) the wind carried it in his