t"
Trithemius: it is the seed from #5 that must be cast upon the earth.
Bacstrom: "Process− First Distillation".
Burckhardt: "when the Spirit is 'embodied', the volatile becomes fixed".
Schumaker: if the prime matter is to be used it must be fixed into a substance "capable of being handled".
On #7a Hortulanus: "You will separate, that is, you will dissolve, because solution is separation of parts.."
Burkhardt: The separation "means the 'extraction' of the soul from the body".
Schumaker "Since the volatile principle is fire −or sometimes, air− stability is produced by its removal. Or,
alternatively but less probably, the earth is impurity ('the gross') and a purified fire ('the subtle') is what is
wanted.
On #8 Albertus Magnus: In intending to teach the operations of alchemy Hermes says the stone "'ascends to
heaven' when by roasting and calcination it takes on the properties of Fire; for alchemists mean by calcinatio
the reduction of material to to powder by burning and roasting. And the material 'again descends from heaven
to earth' when it takes on the properties of Earth by inhumatio, for inhumation revives and nourishes what
was previously killed by calcination".
Hortulanus: "And now he deals with multiplication [of the stone]." "Although our stone is divided in the first
operation into four parts... there are really two principle parts". The ascending, non fixed, and the earth or
ferment. "It is necessary to have a large quantity of this non fixed part and to give it to the stone which has
been made thoroughly clean from dirt.... until the entire stone is borne above by the virtue of the spirit"
"Afterwards it is necessary to incerate the same stone,..with the oil that was extracted in the first operation,
which oil is called the water of the stone" Roast or boil by sublimation until the "entire stone descends... and
remains fixed and fluent". "That which is coporeal is made spiritual by sublimation, and that which is
spiritual is made corporeal by descension".
Trithemius: "When the ternary has at last returned to itself it may, by an inner disposition and great delight,
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
COMMENTARIES 14

ascend from the earth to heaven, thereby receiving both superior and inferior power; thus will it be made
powerful and glorious in the clarity of Unity, demonstrate its ability to bring forth every number, and put to
flight all obscurity".
Bacstrom: "Last Digestion". "The Azoth ascends from the Earth, from the bottom of the Glass, and
redescends in Veins and drops into the Earth and by this continual circulation the Azoth is more and more
subtilised, Volatilizes Sol and carries the volatilized Solar atoms along with it and thereby becomes a Solar
Azoth, i.e. our third and genuine Sophic Mercury". The circulation must continue until "it ceases of itself, and
the Earth has sucked it all in, when it becomes the black pitchy matter, the Toad [the substances in the
alchemical retort and also the lower elements in the body of man −Hall], which denotes complete putrifaction
or Death of the compound".
Read, suggests this section describes the use of a kerotakis, in which metals are suspended and subject to the
action of gasses released from substances heated in the base, and from their condensation and circulation.
Burckhardt: "dissolution of consciousness from all formal 'coagulations' is followed by the 'crystalisation' of
the Spirit, so that active and passive are perfectly united."
Schumaker: "Separate the volatile part of the substance by vaporization but continue heating until the vapour
reunites with the parent body, whereupon you will have obtained the Stone".
On # Trithemius: When the ternary has returned to Unity cleansed of all impurities "the mind understands
without contradiction all the mysteries of the excellently arranged arcanum".
Bacstrom: the black matter becomes White and Red. The Red "having been carried to perfection, medicinaly
and for Metals" is capable of supporting complete mental and physic