is refers to the reciprocal dependence of the active and the passive... essential form cannot be
manifested without passive materia.. the efficacy of the spiritual power depends on the preparedness of the
human 'container' and vice versa.... 'Above' and 'below' are thus related to this one thing and complement one
another in its regard".
Schumaker: "There are corresponding planes in various levels of creation, hence it is safe to draw analogies
between macrocosm and microcosm, the mineral kingdom and the human, animal and vegetable kingdoms
etc".
Needham: "the whole affirmation looks remarkably like the doctrine that extreme of Yang generates Yin, and
vice versa".
On # Hortulanus: "our stone, which was created by God, was born and came forth from a confused mass,
containing in itself all the elements− and hence our stone was born by this single miracle".
Trithemius: "Is it not true that all things flow from one thing, from the goodness of the One, and that
whatever is joined to Unity cannot be diverse, but rather fructifies by means of the simplicity and adaptability
of the One" "What is born from Unity? Is it not the ternary? Take note: Unity is unmixed, the binary is
compounded, and the ternary is reduced to the simplicity of Unity. I, Trithemius, am not of three minds, but
persist in a single integrated mind taking pleasure in the ternary, which gives birth to a marvelous offspring"
(Bran)
Burckhardt: "the undivided, invisible Light of the unconditioned One is refracted into multiplicity by the
prism of the Spirit". As the Spirit contemplates the Unity without full comprehension "it manifests the
'many−sided' All, just as a lens transmits the light it receives as a bundle of rays".
Schumaker: As God is one, all created objects come from one thing, an undifferentiated primal matter.
On #4 Hortulanus: " As one animal naturally generates more animals similar to itself, so the Sun artificially
generates Sun by the power of multiplication of...the stone.... in this artificial generation it is necessary that
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
COMMENTARIES 12

the Sun have a suitable receptacle, consonant with itself, for its sperm and its tincture, and this is the Luna of
the philosophers"
Redgrove: Sun and Moon "probably stand for Spirit and Matter respectively, not gold and silver".
Burckhardt: Sun "is the spirit (nous), while the moon is the soul (psyche)".
Schumaker: "If the moon is associated with water, as because of its 'moisture' [as] was usual, and the sun with
fire, the prima materia is understood to have been generated by fire, born of water, brought down from the
sky by wind, and nourished by earth".
On #5 Albertus Magnus: by this Hermes "means the levigatio [making light weight] of the material, raising it
to the properties of Air. And why he says the wind carries the material [of the stone] in its belly is that, when
the material is placed in an alembic− which is a vessel made like those in which rosewater is prepared− then
by evapouration it is rendered subtle and is raised towards the properties of Air... And there distills and issues
from the mouth of the alembic a watery or oily liquor with all the powers of the elements" (17). In metals the
moisture is not separated from the dryness, but is dissolved in it; and being so dissolved, it moves about there
as if it had been swallowed by the Earth and were moving about in its bowels. And on this account Hermes
said 'The mother of metal is Earth that carries it in her belly'".
Hortulanus: "It is plain that wind is air, and air is life, and life is spirit... And thus it is necessary that the wind
should bear the whole stone.... [However] our stone without the ferment of the earth will never come to the
effect, which ferment is called food"
Trithemius: "the wind carries its seed in her belly".
Maier: By "the wind carried him in its belly" Hermes means " 'He, whose father is the Sun, and whose mother
is the Moon, will be carried before he is born, by wind and vapour, just as