were made from this one,
by conjunction.
4) The father of it is the sun, the mother the moon.
5) The wind bore it in the womb. Its nurse is the earth, the mother of all perfection.
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
Translation from Aurelium Occultae  Philosophorum..Georgio Beato 4

6a)Its power is perfected.
7) If it is turned into earth,
7a) separate the earth from the fire, the subtle and thin from the crude and course, prudently, with modesty
and wisdom.
8) This ascends from the earth into the sky and again descends from the sky to the earth, and receives the
power and efficacy of things above and of things below.
9) By this means you will acquire the glory of the whole world, and so you will drive away all shadows and
blindness.
10) For this by its fortitude snatches the palm from all other fortitude and power. For it is able to penetrate
and subdue everything subtle and everything crude and hard.
11a) By this means the world was founded
12) and hence the marvelous cojunctions of it and admirable effects, since this is the way by which these
marvels may be brought about.
13) And because of this they have called me Hermes Tristmegistus since I have the three parts of the wisdom
and Philsosphy of the whole universe.
14) My speech is finished which I have spoken concerning the solar work [Davis 1926: 874.]
Translation of Issac Newton c. 1680.
1) Tis true without lying, certain most true.
2) That wch is below is like that wch is above that wch is above is like yt wch is below to do ye miracles of
one only thing.
3) And as all things have been arose from one by ye mediation of one: so all things have their birth from this
one thing by adaptation.
4) The Sun is its father, the moon its mother,
5) the wind hath carried it in its belly, the earth its nourse.
6) The father of all perfection in ye whole world is here.
7) Its force or power is entire if it be converted into earth.
7a) Seperate thou ye earth from ye fire, ye subtile from the gross sweetly wth great indoustry.
8) It ascends from ye earth to ye heaven again it desends to ye earth and receives ye force of things superior
inferior.
9) By this means you shall have ye glory of ye whole world thereby all obscurity shall fly from you.
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
Translation of Issac Newton c. 1680. 5

10) Its force is above all force. ffor it vanquishes every subtile thing penetrates every solid thing.
11a) So was ye world created.
12) From this are do come admirable adaptaions whereof ye means (Or process) is here in this.
13) Hence I am called Hermes Trismegist, having the three parts of ye philosophy of ye whole world.
14) That wch I have said of ye operation of ye Sun is accomplished ended.
[Dobbs 1988: 183−4.]
Translation from Kriegsmann (?) alledgedly from the Phoenician
1) I speak truly, not falsely, certainly and most truly
2) These things below with those above and those with these join forces again so that they produce a single
thing the most wonderful of all.
3)And as the whole universe was brought forth from one by the word of one GOD, so also all things are
regenerated perpetually from this one according to the disposition of Nature.
4) It has the Sun for father and the Moon for mother:
5) it is carried by the air as if in a womb, it is nursed by the earth.
6) It is the cause, this, of all perfection of all things throughout the universe.
6a) This will attain the highest perfection of powers
7) if it shall be reduced into earth
7a) Distribute here the earth and there the fire, thin out the density of this the suavest (suavissima) thing of
all.
8)Ascend with the greatest sagacity of genius from the earth into the sky, and thence descend again to the
earth, and recognise that the forces of things above and of things below are one,
9) so as to posses the glory of the whole world− and beyond this man of abject fate may have nothing further.
10)This thing itself presently comes forth stronger by reasons of this fortitude: it subdues all bodies surely,
whether tenuous or