ons of the universe, namely, the
spiritual, psychic and corporeal realms, whose symbols are heaven, air and earth".
Schumaker: "The usual explanation of Tristmegistus.. is that Hermes was the greatest philosopher, the
greatest priest, and the greatest king".
General
Trithemius: "our philosophy is celestial, not worldly, in order that we may faithfuly behold, by means of a
direct intuition of the mind through faith and knowledge, that principle which we call God...."
Trithemius: "Study generates knowledge; knowledge prepares love; love, similarity; similarity, communion;
communion, virtue; virtue, dignity; dignity, power; and power performs the miracle".
Newton "Inferior and superior, fixed and volatile, sulphur and quicksilver have a similar nature and are one
thing, like man and wife. For they differ from one another only by degree of digestion and maturity. Sulphur
is mature quicksilver, and quicksilver is immature sulphur: and on account of this affinity they unite like male
and female, and they act on each other, and through that action they are mutually transmuted into each other
and procreate a more noble offspring to accomplish the miracles of this one thing". "And just as all things
were created from one Chaos by the design of one God, so in our art all things... are born from this one thing
which is our Chaos, by the design of the Artificer and the skilful adaptation of things. And the generation of
this is similar to the human, truly from a father and mother".
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
General 16

Blavatsky: the mysterious thing "is the universal, magical agent, the astral light, which in the correlations of
its forces furnishes the alkahest, the philosopher's stone, and the elixir of life.
Hermetic philosophy names it Azoth, the soul of the world, the celestial virgin, the great Magnes, etc" It
appears to be that which gives organisation ("the maze of force−correlations"), and form i.e.
the perfect geometry of snowflakes.
Sherwood Taylor: "the operation of the Sun.. was carried out by a 'spirit', universal, the source of all things,
having the power of perfecting them. Its virtue is integral [# 6a] (ie having the power to convert the diverse
into a single substance), if it be turned into earth (ie. solidified). This conveyed that the Stone was to be a
solidified pneuma. Pneuma was the link between earth and heaven, having the virtue of the celestial and
subterranean regions− the power of the whole cosmos from the fixed stars to the centre of the earth. It
overcomes every nature and penetrates every solid. It is the source of the whole world and so it can be the
means of changing things in a wonderful way.
The three parts of the philosophy of the whole world are presumably of the celestial, terrestrial, and
subterranean regions".
Shah: The table is "the same as the Sufi dictum... 'Man is the microcosm, creation the macrocosm the unity.
All comes from One. By the joining of the power of contemplation all can be attained.
This essence must be separated from the body first, then combined with the body. This is the Work. Start
with yourself, end with all. Before man, beyond man, transformation'".
A COMMENTARY OF IBN UMAIL
HERMUS said the secret of everything and the life of everything is Water.... This water becomes in wheat,
ferment; in the vine, wine; in the olive, olive oil.... The begining of the child is from water.... Regarding this
spiritual water and the sanctified and thirsty earth, HERMUS the great, crowned with the glorious wisdom
and the sublime sciences, said [#1] Truth it is, indubtible, certain and correct, [#2] that the High is from the
Low and the Low is from the High. They bring about wonders through the one, just as things are produced
from that one essence by a single preparation. Later by his statement [#4] Its father is the Sun and its mother
the Moon he meant their male and their female. They are the two birds which are linked together in the
pictures given regarding the beginning of the opera