ends the revelation of the work of the Sun.
(Shah 1964: 198).
Hypothetical Chinese Original
1) True, true, with no room for doubt, certain, worthy of all trust.
2) See, the highest comes from the lowest, and the lowest from the highest; indeed a marvelous work of the
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
From Idres Shah 10

tao.
3) See how all things originated from It by a single process.
4) The father of it (the elixir) is the sun (Yang), its mother the moon (Yin).
5) The wind bore it in its belly, and the earth nourished it.
6 )This is the father of wondrous works (changes and transformations), the guardian of mysteries,
6a) perfect in its powers, the animator of lights.
7) This fire will be poured upon the earth...
7a) So separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from the gross, acting prudently and with art.
8) It ascends from the earth to the heavens (and orders the lights above), then descends again to the earth; and
in it is the power of the highest and the lowest.
9) Thus when you have the light of lights darkness will flee away from you.
10) With this power of powers (the elixir) you shall be able to get the mastery of every subtle thing, and be
able to penetrate everything that is gross.
11a) In this way was the great world itself formed.
12) Hence thus and thus marvellous operations will be acheived.
[Slightly altered from Needham 1980: 371.]
TEXTUAL REMARKS
On #3 Some Latin texts have meditatione (contemplation), others mediatione (mediation). Some texts have
adaptatione (by adaptation), some have adoptionis (by adoption).
On #6 'Telesmi' is a greek word, some texts have 'thelesmi'.
On #6, 7 In some texts 'Its Power is Complete' is a separate line. In the generally accepted reading, this runs
into #7 producing 'Its Power is complete if versa fuerit to earth'. Where possible this has been indicated by
diving these lines in 6, 6a, 7, 7a On #7, 8 In some texts the 'Wisdom, capacity' (magno ingenio) is read as
referring to #7, and hence the operation of Separation is to be carried out 'carefully', in other readings the
'wisdom' is held to refer to #8 and the product of the Separation which thus ascends with 'wisdom'.
Needham quotes Ruska to the effect that sections 3, 12 and 14 are probably late additions (op.
cit)
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
TEXTUAL REMARKS 11

COMMENTARIES
On #1 Hortulanus: "... the most true Sun is procreated by art. And he says most true in the superlative degree
because the Sun generated by this art exceeds all natural Sun in all of its properties, medicinal and otherwise"
(Davis modified by `Linden')
On #2 Albertus Magnus: Hermes says "the powers of all things below originate in the stars and constellations
of the heavens: and that all these powers are poured down into all things below by the circle called Alaur,
which is, they said, the first circle of the constellations". This descent is "noble when the materials receiving
these powers are more like things above in their brightness and transparency; ignoble when the materials are
confused and foul, so that the heavenly power is, as it were oppressed. Therefore they say that this is the
reason why precious stones more than anything else have wonderful powers" (60 −61). While the "seven
kinds of metals have their forms from the seven planets of the lower spheres" (168).
Hortulanus: "the stone is divided into two principle parts by the magistry, into a superior part which ascends
above and into an inferior part which remains below fixed and clear. And these two parts moreover are
concordant in their virtue since the inferior part is earth which is called nurse and ferment, and the superior
part is the spirit which quickens the whole stone and raises it up.
Wherfore separation made, and conjunction celebrated, many miracles are effected."
Burckhardt: "This refers to the reciprocal dependence of the active and the passive... essential form cannot be
manifested without passive materia.. the efficacy of the spiritual power depends on the preparedness of