ellently arranged arcanum".
Bacstrom: the black matter becomes White and Red. The Red "having been carried to perfection, medicinaly
and for Metals" is capable of supporting complete mental and physical health, and provides "ample means, in
finitum multiplicable to be benevolent and charitable, without any dimunation of our inexhaustable resources,
therefore well may it be called the Glory of the whole World". Contemplation and study of the Philosopher's
Stone ("L. P.") elevates the mind to God.
"The Philosophers say with great Truth, that the L.P. either finds a good man or makes one". "By invigorating
the Organs the Soul makes use of for communicating with exterior objects, the Soul must aquire greater
powers, not only for conception but also for retention". If we pray and have faith "all Obscurity must vanish
of course".
Burckhardt: "Thus the light of the Spirit becomes constant..[and] ignorance, deception, uncertainty, doubt and
foolishness will be removed from consciousness".
On # Trithemius: The Philosopher's Stone is another name for the 'one thing', and is able to "conquer every
subtile thing and to penetrate every solid". "This very noble virtue... consists of maximal fortitude, touching
everything with its desirable excellence".
Bacstrom: "The L.P. does possess all the Powers concealed in Nature, not for destruction but for exhaltation
and regeneration of matter, in the three Departments of Nature". "It refixes the most subtil Oxygen into its
own firey Nature". The power increases "in a tenfold ratio, at every multiplication". So it can penetrate Gold
and Silver, and fix mercury, Crystals and Glass Fluxes.
Burckhardt: "Alchemical fixation is nevertheless more inward... Through its union with the spirit bodily
consciousness itself becomes a fine and penetrating power". He quotes Jabir "The body becomes a spirit, and
takes on... fineness, lightness, extensibility, coloration... The spirit...
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
COMMENTARIES 15

becomes a body and aquires the latter's resistance to fire, immobility and duration. From both bodies a light
substance is born , which.. precisely takes up a middle position between the two extremes".
Schumaker: The product of the distillation and reunion will "dominate less solid substances, but because of
its own subtlety it will 'penetrate' and hence dominate, other solid things less pure and quasi−spiritual than
itself".
On # Burckhardt: "the little world is created according to the prototype of the great world", when the human
realises their original nature is the image of God.
Schumaker: "The alchemical operation is a paradigm of the creative process. We may note the sexual
overtones of what has preceeded"
On #12 Burckhardt: "In the Arabic text this is: "This way is traversed by the sages".
On # Hortulanus: "He here teaches in an occult manner the things from which the stone is made." "the stone
is called perfect because it has in itself the nature of minerals, ofvegetables and of animals.
For the stone is three and one, tripple and single, having four natures.... and three colours, namely black,
white and red. It is also called the grain of corn because unless it shall have died, it remains itself alone. And
if it shall have died... it bears much fruit when it is in conjunction..."
Newton: "on account of this art Mercurius is called thrice greatest, having three parts of the philosophy of the
whole world, since he signifies the Mercury of the philosophers.... and has dominion in the mineral kingdom,
the vegetable kingdom, and the animal kingdom".
Bacstrom: the wisdom of the world (?) is hidden in "Chiram and its Use". Hermes "signifies a Serpent, and
the Serpent used to be an Emblem of Knowledge or Wisdom."
Burckhardt: "The three parts of wisdom correspond to the three great divisions of the universe, namely, the
spiritual, psychic and corporeal realms, whose symbols are heaven, air and earth".
Schumaker: "The usual explanation of Tristmegistus.. is that Hermes was the greatest