in her belly".
Maier: By "the wind carried him in its belly" Hermes means " 'He, whose father is the Sun, and whose mother
is the Moon, will be carried before he is born, by wind and vapour, just as a flying bird is carried by air'.
From the vapours of winds, which are nothing else but wind in motion, water proceeds, when condensed, and
from that water, mixed with earth, all minerals and metals arise". The substance carried by the wind is "in
chemical respect.. the sulphur, which is carried in mercury". Lull says "'The stone is the fire, carried in the
belly of the air'. In physical respect it is the unborn child that will soon be born". To be clearer, "'All mercury
is composed of vapours, that is to say of water, which the earth raises along with it into the thin air, and of
earth, which the air compels to return into watery earth or earthy water" As the elements contained within are
each reduced to a watery condition, they either follow the volatile elements upward as in common mercury,
or they stay below with the solid elements as in philosophical Mercury "and in the solid metals". So
"Mercury is the wind which receives the sulphur... as the unripe fruit from the mothers womb, or from the
ashes of the burnt mother's body and takes it to a place where it may ripen".
Ripley says "our child shall be born in the air, that is the belly of the wind" [de Jong 1969: 55− 7.] Maier (2nd
Comment) on "The earth is its nurse": Food changes into the substance of the eater and is then assimilated.
"This harmony dominates the whole of nature, for the like enjoys the like".
The same happens in the Work and Nature "just as is the growth of the child in the mother's womb. So also a
father, a mother and a nurse have been attributed to the philosophical child... it comes into being from the
twofold seed and then grows as an embryo does". As a woman must moderate her diet to avoid miscarriage,
"in the same way one must set about philosophical work with moderation". The Seeds also have to be united.
"Philosophers say that the one comes from the East and the other from the West and become one; what does
this mean but combining in a retort, a moderate temperature and nourishment?". "One may wonder why the
earth is referred to as the nurse of the philosophic child, since barreness and dryness are the main properties
of the element earth". The answer is that not the element, but the whole Earth is meant. "It is the nurse of
 The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
COMMENTARIES 13

Heaven not because it resolves, washes and moistens the foetus, but because it coagulates, fastens and colours
the latter and changes it into sap and blood... The Earth contains a wonderful juice which changes the nature
of the one who feeds on it, as Romulus is believed to have been changed by the wolf's milk into a bellicose
individual" [de Jong 1969: 63 −5.]
Burckhardt: "The wind which carries the spiritual germ in its body, is the vital breath". Vital breath is the
substance of the realm between heaven and earth, it "is also Quicksilver which contains the germ of gold in a
liquid state". The earth is "the body, as an inward reality".
On #6 Burckhardt: the word talisman is derived from Telesma. Talismans work by corresponding to their
prototype, and by making a "'condensation', on the subtle plane, of a spiritual state. This explains the
similarity between the talisman, as the bearer of an invisible influence, and the alchemical elixir, as the
'ferment' of metallic transformation".
On #7 Hortulanus: The stone is perfect and complete if it is turned into earth "that is if the soul of the stone
itself.... is turned into earth, namely of the stone and is fixed so that the whole substance of the stone becomes
one with its nurse, namely the earth, and the whole stone is converted to ferment"
Trithemius: it is the seed from #5 that must be cast upon the earth.
Bacstrom: "Process− First Distillation".
Burckhardt: "when the Spirit is 'embodied', the volatile becomes fixed".
Schumaker: if