ver	you	have	done	in	the	human	world,	all	the	virtuous	and	negative
actions	 you	 have	 committed	 in	 the	 human	 world,	 will	 visibly	 appear,
immediately.	So	what	lies	and	deceit	have	you	spoken?	Look	at	this	mirror	right
now!	(
Then,	looking	at	the	mirror
)	Well,	the	virtuous	and	negative	actions	of
which	you	have	now	spoken	are	not	false.	Well	done!	You	will	be	sent	on	the
white	path.
THE	 BLACK	 DEMON	 [REPRESENTING	 THE	 DECEASED’S	 BAD
CONSCIENCE]:	Hey!	May	I	speak	in	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja!	This	bad
person	called	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	has	indulged	his	whole	life	in	negative
actions	and	has	cared	only	for	his	own	long-term	selfish	interests.	His	name	is
householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	and	his	nickname	is	‘monkey-head’.	As	for	this	faithless
householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	his	[birth]	year	is	the	year	of	the	ox,	his	[birth]place	is
Kāmarūpa	city,	and	his	background	is	that	of	the	mercantile	class.	He	engaged	in
the	 following	 negative	 actions:	 Hurrying	 uptown,	 he	 killed	 his	 father	 and
quarrelled;	then	rushing	downtown,	he	fought	with	his	neighbours,	he	threw
stones	at	the	camel	belonging	to	his	neighbour	Śr
ῑ
bhadra	and	although	he	killed
it,	he	denied	his	action	and	lied	about	it.	He	pushed	the	scribe	Prajñāmati’s
young	elephant	over	a	cliff,	and,	although	he	killed	it,	he	denied	his	action	and
lied	about	it.	Now,	we	can	compare	the	pebbles!	How	will	it	be	possible	for	him
to	take	the	white	path?	It	is	utterly	appropriate	that	he	should	go	on	the	black
path.	(
He	pours	three	handfuls	of	black	pebbles	in	[to	his	bowl]
.)
THE	WHITE	DEITY	[REPRESENTING	THE	GOOD	CONSCIENCE]:	May
I	speak	in	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja!	The	householder	Lakṣmin	[Śr
ῑ
jāta]	is	a
most	faithful	devotee.	He	has	strong	interest	in	the	[sacred]	teachings	and	has
avoided	negative	actions.	When	about	five	hundred	miscreants	were	brought	to
trial	in	the	presence	of	the	Mahārāja,	he	offered	five	hundred	
srang
	of	gold,	and
saved	their	lives.	In	the	Indian	city	of	Kāmarūpa,	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta	alone	is
one	who	possesses	great	faith.	Now,	we	can	compare	the	pebbles!	How	will	it	be
possible	for	him	to	take	the	black	path?	He	should	now	set	out,	guided	along	the
white	path!	(
He	pours	out	about	six	measures	of	white	pebbles	[into	his	bowl].
	)

THE	 MONKEY-HEADED	 ELEMENTAL	 SPIRIT:	 Deity	 and	 demon	 of
conscience,	both	of	you	have	no	need	to	disagree,	because	when	I	raise	my	scale
balance,	the	measures	of	virtue	and	negativity	will	be	determined	by	the	weights.
Now,	if	you	look,	[the	outcome]	will	be	obvious.	(
He	weighs	the	pebbles,
whereupon	the	white	[container]	is	three	times	heavier.
)
DHARMARĀJA:	Wonderful!	Those	who	have	obtained	a	human	body,	who
delight	in	the	[sacred]	teachings,	and	fully	realise	their	life’s	potential	-	as	this
[achievement]	cannot	be	stolen	or	snatched	by	others	-	will	themselves	find
happiness	through	their	own	virtues.	With	respect	to	this	way	of	being,	such	as
that	of	the	house	
holder	Lakṣmin	[Śr
ῑ
jāta]	-	how	wonderful	it	would	be	if	all
sentient	beings	were	to	do	the	same!	Supplicate	Avalokiteśvara	right	now,	and
instantly	travel	the	white	path!	(
Dharmarāja	prays
)	I	pray	to	the	meditational
deity	Mahākāruṇika,	at	the	summit	of	Mount	Potālaka	in	the	east!	Grant	your
blessing	that	we	may	realise	the	nature	of	mind	to	be	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality!	(
He	then	recites	the
	Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas	and
Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
28
	
and	then	gives	formal	introduction	to	the	methods
for	obstructing	the	womb	entrances	during	the	intermediate	state	[of	rebirth]
and	for	choosing	a	womb.
29
	
Lastly,	he	confers	the	introduction	to	the	methods	of
transferring	 [consciousness]	 to	 the	 pure	 buddha-fields.
30
	
Immediately
afterwards,	the	curtain	is	suddenly	drawn	back,	and	the	form	of	Avalokiteśvara
is	vividly	displayed.	[The	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta]	is	led	along	the	path	[of	virtue]
represented	by	the	white	carpet,	clad	in	fine	robes,	and	wearing	fine	ornaments.
)
DHARMARĀJA	(
offering	praise
):	O,	C