essence	that	accounts	for	our	experience	of	consciousness	as	having	the
natural	quality	of	luminosity	and	awareness?
Finally,	then,	when	considering	the	interrelationship	between	mind,	body	and
the	environment	at	the	subtle	level,	we	know	that	material	things	are	composed
of	cells,	atoms	and	particles	and	that	consciousness	is	composed	of	moments.
That	is	to	say	that	mind	and	matter	have	distinctly	different	natures	and	therefore
have	different	substantial	causes.	Material	things	come	into	being	based	on	other
material	entities	such	as	particles,	atoms	and	cells	and	the	mind	comes	into	being
based	on	a	previous	moment	of	mind,	which	is	something	that	is	luminous	and
has	the	capacity	to	be	aware.	Each	moment	of	awareness	therefore	depends	on	a
previous	moment	of	awareness	as	its	cause.	This	is	the	reasoning	upon	which
Buddhist	logic	asserts	that	there	is	at	the	level	of	subtle	mind	and	subtle	wind	a
beginningless	continuum	of	mind	and	matter.
It	is	through	reflection	on	the	above	themes:	the	law	of	cause	and	effect,
dependent	origination,	the	dynamics	of	our	physical	environment,	and,	based	on
our	analysis	of	the	nature	of	mind,	the	mode	of	the	arising	and	subsiding	of
thoughts,	the	shifts	in	the	modalities	of	our	consciousness	between	deep	sleep,
dreams	and	our	waking	state,	etc.,	that	the	notion	of	continuity	of	consciousness
may	first	become	established	as	relevant	to	the	understanding	of	our	current
condition.	 Once	 the	 notion	 of	 this	 continuity	 has	 been	 confirmed,	 through
reflection	and	experience,	then	it	becomes	logical	to	prepare	oneself	for	death
and	for	future	existences.
Now,	as	to	the	nature	of	the	actual	preparation	itself,	this	will	depend	on	each
individual’s	depth	of	spiritual	aspiration.	For	example,	if	an	individual	is	simply
seeking	a	favourable	rebirth	as	a	human	being,	there	is	no	need	to	engage	in	a
sophisticated	 meditative	 path	 related	 to	 the	 processes	 of	 death	 and	 rebirth.
Simply	to	live	a	virtuous	life	is	seen	as	sufficient.	Similarly,	in	the	case	of	those
who	are	seeking	personal	liberation	from	conditioned	existence	and	also	in	the
case	of	those	whose	practice	is	confined	to	the	sūtra	level	of	the	Mahāyāna	path,
their	 meditative	 preparation	 will	 be	 limited	 to	 ensuring	 the	 attainment	 of
successive	forms	of	existence	that	will	be	conducive	to	the	continuation	of	their
journey	towards	enlightenment.	For	these	three	kinds	of	individuals,	no	actual
techniques	for	utilising	the	time	of	death	as	an	essential	element	of	the	spiritual
path	have	been	set	down	in	the	classical	Buddhist	literature.	Nevertheless,	since
the	understanding	of	the	processes	of	death,	the	intermediate	state	and	rebirth	are
crucial	to	our	understanding	of	the	nature	of	existence,	we	do	find	extensive
discussion	 of	 these	 three	 processes,	 even	 in	 the	 texts	 which	 relate	 to	 the

aspirations	of	these	three	kinds	of	persons.
It	is	exclusively	in	tantra,	however,	and	particularly	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,
that	the	methods	for	utilising	the	processes	of	death,	the	intermediate	state	and
rebirth	are	specifically	taught	as	the	basis	for	achieving	liberation	from	cyclic
existence.	These	methods	involve	the	development	of	a	skilful	relationship	with
certain	experiential	stages	that	an	individual	actually	induces	with	the	intention
of	enhancing	spiritual	realisation	and	the	fruition	of	their	capacities	as	a	human
being.
Generally	speaking,	the	practices	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	present	a	spiritual
path	which	enables	the	individual	to	attain	complete	buddhahood	within	a	single
lifetime,	prior	to	the	moment	of	death.	Yet,	for	those	who	are	unable	to	achieve
this,	it	becomes	crucial	to	use	the	transformative	opportunities	offered	by	the
naturally	occurring	processes	of	death,	the	intermediate	state	and	rebirth.	Hence,
in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	it	is	not	merely	the	preparation	for	a	more	developed
future	rebirth	which	is	important,	but	of	
more	fundamental	significance	is	the
personal	preparation	for	using	one’s	own	d