ot	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to
be	 the	 buddha-body	 of	 your	 own	 intrinsic	 awareness.	 These	 are	 your	 own
meditational	deities,	so	do	not	be	terrified.	This,	in	reality,	is	the	transcendent
lord	Vairocana	and	his	consort,	so	do	not	be	afraid.	Recognition	and	liberation
will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[within	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood
in	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource.
Yet	should	[the	deceased],	once	again,	flee	in	awe	and	terror	and	thereby	not
attain	recognition,	then,	on	the	ninth	day,	the	Vajra	family	of	blood-drinking
deities	will	come	to	escort	him	or	her.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	He	who	is	called	the
transcendent	lord	Vajra	Heruka,	of	the	Vajra	family	of	blood-drinking	deities,
will	arise	from	the	eastern	direction	of	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	His
body	is	dark	blue	in	colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set
apart.	His	right	face	is	white,	the	left	red	and	the	central	face	is	blue.	In	his	six
hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	vajra,	in	the	middle	one,	a	skull-
cup	and	in	the	last	hand	an	axe,	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand,	he	holds	a	bell,
in	the	middle	one,	a	skull-cup	and	in	the	last	a	ploughshare.	The	female	consort
Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around	his	neck
and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to

be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are	your	own	meditational
deities,	so	do	not	be	terrified.	This,	in	reality,	is	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva
and	his	consort,	so	do	not	fear	them.	Be	devoted	to	them!	Recognition	and
liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource.
Yet,	if	those	individuals	who	are	greatly	obscured	by	past	actions,	again	flee	in
awe	and	terror	and	thereby	do	not	attain	recognition,	then	on	the	tenth	day,	the
Ratna	family	of	blood-drinking	deities	will	come	to	escort	them.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	tenth	day,	he	who
is	called	Ratna	Heruka,	of	the	Ratna	family	of	blood-drinking	deities,	will	arise
from	the	southern	direction	of	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	His	body	is
dark	yellow	in	colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set	apart.
His	right	face	is	white,	the	left	red,	and	the	central	face	is	a	burning	dark	yellow.
In	his	six	hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	
hand,	a	jewel,	in	the	middle
one,	a	khaṭvāṅga	and	in	the	last	hand	a	club	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand,	he
holds	a	bell,	in	the	middle	one,	a	skull-cup	and	in	the	last	a	trident.	The	female
consort	Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around
his	neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to
be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are	your	own	meditational
deities,	 so	 do	 not	 be	 terrified.	 This,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Ratnasambhava	 and	 his	 consort,	 so	 be	 devoted	 to	 them!	 Recognition	 and
liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	[in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource].
Yet,	even	after	receiving	this	introduction,	there	are	those	who,	owing	to	their
negative	 habitual	 tendencies,