higher	rebirth]!
May	the	diverse	animal-headed	Iśvar
ῑ
	eliminate	all	obstacles!
May	 the	 four	 supreme	 Female	 Gatekeepers	 obstruct	 the	 entrance	 to
[mundane]	births;
And	thus	[encircled],	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
When	we	roam	alone,	separated	from	our	loved	ones,
And	[myriad]	images	of	emptiness	arise,	naturally	manifesting,
May	the	buddhas	[quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	 may	 the	 fear	 of	 the	 awesome	 and	 terrifying	 intermediate	 state	 be

annulled.
When	the	radiant	light	path	of	pristine	cognition	dawns,
May	we	recognise	[its	nature],	without	awe	and	without	terror,
And	as	the	[manifold]	forms	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arise,
May	we	be	fearlessly	confident,	and	recognise	[the	characteristics	of]	the
intermediate	state.
When	we	experience	suffering,	as	the	result	of	negative	past	actions,
May	our	meditational	deities	utterly	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	the	natural	sound	of	reality	reverberates	like	a	thousand	peals	of
thunder,
May	[all	sounds]	be	heard	as	the	sacred	resonance	of	the	Greater	Vehicle.
When	we	are	driven	on	by	past	actions,	without	a	refuge,
May	the	Great	Compassionate	One,	Mahākāruṇika,	protect	us,
And	as	we	experience	suffering	generated	by	habitual	tendencies	and	past
actions,
May	the	meditative	stabilities	of	inner	radiance	and	bliss	[naturally]	arise.
May	the	fields
30
	
of	the	five	elements	not	rise	up	as	a	hostile	force,
But	may	we	see	these	as	the	buddha	fields	of	the	five	enlightened	families!
31
	
By	the	blessing	of	the	spiritual	teachers	of	the	oral	lineage,
By	the	compassion	of	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,
And	by	the	force	of	the	purity	of	my	altruistic	aspiration,
May	all	the	aspirational	prayers,	here	expressed,
Be	immediately	realised.
CONCLUSION
If	one	consistently	perseveres	in	this	
Spiritual	Practice
	of	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities,	together	with	the	recitation	of	the	aspirational	prayers,	even	the
negativity	 and	 obscurations	 caused	 by	 past	 actions	 which	 involve	 the	 five
inexpiable	crimes	will	be	purified.	Even	the	very	hell	realms	themselves	[can]	be
stirred	[by	the	power	of	this	practice].	If	this	practice	is	followed,	there	is	no
doubt	that	one	will	be	born	as	an	awareness	holder	amongst	the	fields	of	the
Conquerors.	For	it	is	said	in	the	transmitted	precepts	of	the	Transcendent	One
Samantabhadra	himself:

	
‘One	who	respectfully	pays	homage	to	the	maṇḍala
Of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	of	the	
Magical	Net
,
Will	purify	each	and	every	transgression	[of	the	commitments].
Even	the	negativity	of	the	five	inexpiable	crimes	will	be	purified.
Even	the	hell	realms	themselves	may	be	stirred	[by	the	force	of	this	practice],
And	one	will	become	recognised	as	an	awareness	holder,
Among	the	fields	of	the	Conquerors.’
	
The	advantages	which	accrue	from	engaging	in	the	
Spiritual	Practice
	
as	here	set
down,	are	extremely	great.	It	is	said	that	just	by	simply	hearing,	once,	the	names
of	the	deities	of	this	maṇḍala,	one	will	avoid	rebirth	in	the	lower	existences,	and
buddhahood	will	eventually	be	attained.	Samantabhadra	himself	has	said:
	
‘If	anyone	hears,	only	once,	the	names	of	these	deities	of	the	maṇḍala,	he	or
she	will	be	saved	from	falling	into	the	great	hells.’
	
And:
	
‘Anyone	who	respectfully	pays	homage
To	the	natural	maṇḍala	of	the	
Magical	Net
,
Will	purify	each	and	every	transgression	[of	the	commitments].
The	commitments	will	be	repaired,	and	accomplishments	attained.’
	
Therefore,	since	the	advantages	of	following	this	practice	are	beyond	expression,
one	should	persevere	with	this	
Spiritual	Practice
	
and	[consistently]	visualise
one’s	own	body	as	the	assembly	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	Thus,	the
supreme	and	common	accomplishments	will	be	attained	in	this	very	life;	and
after	one	has	died,	when	the	visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	dawn
during	the	intermediat