,	you	will	[wish	to]	turn	away	in	terror	from
the	bright	and	dazzling	green	luminosity	and	you	will	come	to	feel	delight	and
attachment	towards	the	dull	red	light	of	the	antigods.	At	this	moment,	abandon
your	fear,	and	recognise	the	green	luminosity,	bright	and	dazzling,	radiant	and
clear,	to	be	pristine	cognition.	Let	your	awareness	relax	and	abide	directly
within	it,	resting	in	a	state	of	non-activity.	Pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is
the	light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amoghasiddhi’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge
in	 it.’	 This,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the	 light-ray	 hook	 of	 the	 transcendent	 lord

Amoghasiddhi’s	 compassion,	 which	 is	 known	 as	 the	 pristine	 cognition	 of
accomplishment.	Be	devoted	to	it!	Do	not	turn	away!	Even	if	you	do	turn	away,
the	luminosity	will	accompany	you	inseparably.	So,	do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be
attached	to	the	dull	red	light	of	the	antigods.	This	is	the	inviting	path	of	your
past	actions,	which	you	yourself	have	engaged	in,	whilst	motivated	by	deep	envy.
If	you	become	attached	to	this	dull	light,	you	will	fall	into	the	realms	of	the
antigods	and	experience	the	unbearable	sufferings	of	[unrelenting]	conflict	and
quarrelling.	This	[dull	light]	is	an	obstacle	blocking	the	path	to	liberation!	Do
not	be	attached	to	it!	Give	up	your	yearning!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be	devoted	to
the	green	light,	which	is	radiant	and	dazzling,	and	focus	intently	and	single-
mindedly	on	the	transcendent	lord	Amoghasiddhi	and	his	consort,	and	recite	the
following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	envy,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Amoghasiddhi	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Samayatārā	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	 light	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 transcendent	 lord	 Amoghasiddhi	 and	 his
consort,	 and	 you	 will	 attain	 buddhahood,	 as	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource,	 in	 the	 northern	 Buddha	 field	 [called]	 ‘Matrix	 of	 Enlightened
Activities’
	(
Karmaprasiddhi
).
By	giving	this	introduction	repeatedly	in	this	way,	however	weak	the	[positive]
residue	of	[a	deceased	individual’s]	past	actions	might	be,	he	or	she	will	[have
the	opportunity	to]	attain	recognition	at	one	point	or	another.	As	recognition
occurs	at	any	point,	it	will	be	impossible	for	liberation	not	to	be	achieved.
However,	owing	to	a	long	association	with	myriad	habitual	tendencies	and	an
unfamiliarity	with	pure	vision	and	pristine	cognition,	even	after	being	introduced
repeatedly	in	this	way,	there	are	some	who	are	nevertheless	led	backwards	by
negative	propensities,	despite	this	setting	face	to	face	having	been	given.	Failing
to	be	gripped	by	the	light-ray	hook	of	compassion,	they	will	be	overcome	by
awe	and	terror	[upon	the	arising]	of	the	lights	and	rays,	and	continue	to	wander

downwards.
Thereupon,	 on	 the	 sixth	 day,	 the	 male	 and	 female	 deities	 of	 the	 five
enlightened	families,	together	with	their	retinues,	will	arise	simultaneously,	and
at	that	very	moment,	the	six	[dull]	lights,	[indicative]	of	the	six	classes	of	living
beings,	will	also	arise	simultaneously.
Therefore,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given
with	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	Until	yesterday	the	visions
of	the	five	individual	enlightened	families	arose	before	you.	Despite	this,	even
though	the	[former]	introduction	was	given,	you	experienced	awe	and	terror;	a
response	 generated	 by	 your	 habitual	 tendencies.	 Consequently,	 you	 have
remained	in	your	present	state,	until	now.	If	you	had	previously	recognised	[one
of]	the	natural	luminosities	of	the	pristine	cognitions	of	the	five	enlightened
familie