ace	ful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
,	and	he	bestowed	it
on	the	translator,	[Chokro]lui	Gyeltsen,	as	his	legacy	[of	good	fortune].	Then,
directing	his	enlightened	intention	towards	living	beings	of	the	future	degenerate
age,	who	would	be	of	meagre	merit,	he	concealed	it	in	the	form	of	a	treasure	at
Mount	Gampodar	in	Dakpo,	at	a	site	which	resembles	a	dancing	god.
THE	PROPHECY	CONCERNING	KARMA	LINGPA
Padmasambhava’s	prophesies	concerning	the	treasure-finder	Karma	Lingpa	and
his	immediate	successors	are	also	recounted	elsewhere	within	the	cycle.	The
following	verses	are	taken	from	Gendun	Gyeltsen’s	fifteenth-century	account,
entitled	
Padmasambhava’s	Prophecy	of	the	Treasure-finder	and	the	Series	of
Authentic	Lineage	Teachers
	(pp.	22ff.).	In	particular,	they	offer	a	rationale	for
the	original	concealment	of	the	texts	and	predictions	regarding	their	subsequent
discovery	and	secret	transmission.	It	is	clear	that	even	in	this	early	formative
period	the	cycle	of	texts	had	acquired	two	distinct	titles,	
The	Great	Liberation	by
Hearing	during	the	Intermediate	States
,	and	
The	Natural	Liberation	through
Recognition	of	Enlightened	Intention
,	reflecting	its	shorter	and	longer	versions.
It	says	in	a	prophetic	declaration	of	Orgyan	Rinpoche:
‘In	the	future,	during	the	final	era,	the	degenerate	age,
When	monks	[act]	like	pigs	and	make	women	pregnant,

When	virtuous	actions	generate	and	sustain	resentment,
When	the	most	noble	of	monks	takes	a	bride,
When	factionalism	and	wars	are	widespread,
At	that	time	there	is	no	doubt	that	all	those	bereft	of	such	instructions
Will	fall	into	the	inferior	existences.
So	to	benefit	the	sentient	beings	of	this	degenerate	age,
I	have	committed	[this	cycle	of	teachings]	to	writing,
And	concealed	them	at	Mount	Gampodar.
In	that	age,	a	supremely	fortunate	son	will	be	born.
His	father	will	have	the	name	Accomplished	Master	Nyinda,
And	he	will	be	the	courageous	“Karma	Lingpa”.
On	his	right	thigh	there	will	be	a	mole,
Resembling	the	eye	of	pristine	cognition,
And	he	will	be	born	in	the	dragon	or	snake	year,
Into	a	heroic	family	line,	the	fruit	of	past	good	actions.
May	that	fortunate	person	encounter	this	[teaching]!
‘But	he	[Karma	Lingpa]	should	not	publicly	teach	the	cycles	of
The	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 Natural	 Liberation	 through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
To	anyone	at	all,	even	by	whispering	into	the	wind,
And	so	it	should	remain	until	the	time	of	the	third	lineage	holder.
Obstacles	will	arise	if	these	[teachings]	are	publicly	taught!
However,	he	should	impart	the	cycle	of	the
Great	Compassionate	One:	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
To	all	of	his	fortunate	students!
	
‘If	the	oral	instructions	of	the	lineage	issuing	from	the	third	generation
lineage	holder
Are	kept	secret	for	seven	years,	there	will	be	no	obstacles.
When	seven	years	have	passed,
That	[third	generation	successor]	may	properly	impart	to	others
The	empowerments	and	practical	application	of	the	[abridged]	cycle,
The	
[Great]	Liberation	[by	Hearing]	during	the	Intermediate	States.
Then,	when	nine	years	have	passed,	the	[complete]	cycle	of	the
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
Should	be	imparted	gradually,	not	all	at	once!
	

‘These	treasures	will	be	extracted	in	the	region	of	Dakpo,	in	Southern
Kongpo,
And	they	will	be	concentrated	for	the	sake	of	living	beings,
In	the	region	of	Draglong,	in	Upper	Kongpo.
Karma	Lingpa’s	activity	on	behalf	of	living	beings	will	ripen	in	the
north!’
THE	LIFE	OF	KARMA	LINGPA
Although	the	exact	dates	of	Karma	Lingpa	are	unknown,	his	birth	and	death
have	 been	 accurately	 placed	 within	 the	 fourteenth	 century.	 The	 following
passages	describing	his	life	and	those	of	his	immediate	successors	are	taken	from
Gyarawa	 Namka	 Chokyi	 Gyeltsen’s	 fifteenth-century	
Jewel	 Garland:	 An
Abridged	 History
	
of	 the	 Lineage	 (pp.	 40ff.).	 Of	 particular	 interes