in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	it	is	not	merely	the	preparation	for	a	more	developed
future	rebirth	which	is	important,	but	of	
more	fundamental	significance	is	the
personal	preparation	for	using	one’s	own	death	and	subsequent	states	as	a	means
of	achieving	liberation.
In	the	literature	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	as	I	have	mentioned,	the	three	realms
of	conditioned	existence	into	which	a	human	being	may	be	born	are	described	in
terms	of	differing	expressions	or	modalities	of	energy	(
rlung
)	and	it	is	said	that
our	fundamental	ignorance	is	the	root	of	conditioned	existence	and	that	karmic
energy	is	its	activating	force.	Further,	from	the	tantric	perspective,	death,	the
intermediate	 state	 and	 rebirth	 are	 also	 seen	 as	 nothing	 other	 than	 differing
modalities	of	karmic	energy.	The	point	at	which	the	gross	levels	of	energy	are
completely	dissolved	and	only	the	subtle	energies	remain	is	death.	The	stage	at
which	these	energies	unfold	into	a	more	manifest	form	is	the	intermediate	state,
and	the	stage	at	which	they	eventually	manifest	substantially	is	called	rebirth.
Thus,	all	three	states	are	differing	manifestations	of	energy	(
rlung
).	Based	on	this
understanding,	since	death	is	the	state	when	all	the	gross	levels	of	energy	and
consciousness	 have	 been	 dissolved,	 and	 only	 the	 subtle	 energies	 and
consciousnesses	remain,	it	is	possible	for	an	advanced	yogin	to	meditatively
induce	a	state	which	is	almost	identical	to	the	actual	experience	of	death.	This
can	be	achieved	because	it	is	possible	to	meditatively	bring	about	the	dissolution
of	 the	 gross	 levels	 of	 energy	 and	 consciousness.	 When	 such	 a	 task	 is
accomplished,	the	meditator	gains	an	enormous	potential	to	progress	definitively
in	 his	 or	 her	 spiritual	 practice.	 For	 at	 the	 stage,	 when	 the	 experience	 of
fundamental	inner	radiance	is	genuinely	effected	through	such	a	method,	the

yogin	gains	the	capacity	to	actualise	the	illusory	body	of	the	meditational	deity	-
thus	ensuring	the	realisation	of	perfect	buddhahood	in	this	lifetime.
This	achievement	of	perfect	buddhahood	entails	the	actualisation	of	the	three
dimensions	or	bodies	of	a	buddha	(
trikāya
).	These	fruitional	bodies	are	related
both	 to	 our	 ultimate	 natural	 state	 and	 to	 the	 emanational	 qualities	 of	 full
enlightenment.	Interestingly,	we	see	exactly	the	same	pattern	of	dimensions	in
our	ordinary	existence.	Death	is	the	point	at	which	both	the	physical	and	mental
fields	dissolve	into	inner	radiance	and	where	both	consciousness	and	energy
exist	at	their	most	subtle	non-dual	level,	as	in	deep	sleep.	This	mode	in	its
fruitional	state	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	(
dharmakāya
).	Then,	from	within
this	essential	or	
natural	state,	one	enters	into	the	intermediate	state,	where,
although	 there	 is	 perceptual	 experience,	 the	 phenomenal	 forms	 are
comparatively	 subtle	 and	 non-substantive,	 as	 in	 a	 dream.	 This	 mode	 in	 its
fruitional	state	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	(
sambhogakāya
).	Then,
from	this	state,	one	assumes	a	grosser	physical	existence	culminating	in	actual
rebirth,	as	in	our	normal	waking	experience.	This	mode	in	its	fruitional	state	is
the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	(
nirmāṇakāya
).	Thus,	we	see	a	direct	parallel
between	the	three	natural	states	of	our	existence	and	the	three	dimensions	of	a
fully	enlightened	being.
Now,	since	actualisation	of	these	three	dimensions	can	be	effected	through	the
transformation	of	the	three	ordinary	states	of	our	existence,	we	find	an	array	of
practices	 which	 contain	 specific	 meditative	 techniques	 focusing	 on	 those
attributes	which	the	three	ordinary	states	of	existence	and	the	three	buddha-
bodies	have	in	common.	Through	these	practices	a	continuity	is	developed
between	the	ground	or	base	(the	ordinary	state),	the	path,	and	the	fruition	(the
buddha-bodies).	In	order	to	highlight	the	potential	for	liberation	which	exists	in
the	skilful	transformation	of	the	ordinary	states	of	existence,	the	great	Indian
Buddhist	mas