to	the	four	commitments	taken	by	practitioners	of	the	Great	Perfection:
nothingness,	evenness,	uniqueness,	and	spontaneity,	on	which	see	R.	Barron
(trans.),	
The	Precious	Treasury	of	the	Way	of	Abiding
.
31
	
Tib.	
btags-grol
.	See	Ch.	14.
32
	
Tib.	
thos-grol
.	See	Ch.	11.
11	The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing

Part	One
1
	
Tib.	
Thos-grol	chen-mo
.
2
	
.	Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
Tib.	
khrid-kyi	rim-pa
.	This	refers	to	all	the	levels	of	instruction	received	during
the	course	of	a	person’s	lifetime,	including	those	based	on	the	sūtras	and	the
tantras.	The	experiential	cultivation	of	the	‘great	emptiness’	(
stong-pa	chen-po
)
which	the	practitioner	of	Mahāyoga	enters	into	in	the	course	of	daily	practice
brings	about	a	dissolution	of	normal	conceptual	consciousness	into	a	non-dual,
non-conceptual	awareness.	The	signs	which	accompany	the	successful
actualisation	of	this	meditative	process	are	identical	to	those	which	occur	at	the
time	of	death.	The	resulting	familiarity	with	the	process	of	the	dissolution	of
consciousness	allows	the	practitioner,	at	the	time	of	death,	to	pass	through	an
accustomed	process	and	thereby	to	enter	the	non-conceptual	inner	radiance
without	confusion	and	to	rest	in	its	nature,	with	stability.
4
	
See	above,	Ch.	10.
5
	
See	above,	Ch.	8.
6
	
Tib.	
bden-pa’i	stobs
.	This	refers	to	an	invocation	prayer	evoking	the	power	of
the	truth	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	and	phenomena	embodied	in	the
meditational	deities,	the	sacred	writings,	and	the	community	of	sincere
practitioners.
7
	
This	esoteric	meditative	process,	which	is	divulged	only	to	fully	qualified
practitioners,	is	described	in	supplementary	texts	relating	to	the	present	cycle,
such	as	
Guiding	the	Deceased	to	Higher	Rebirths:	The	Natural	Liberation	of	the
Six	Realms	of	Beings
	(
Tshe-’das	gnas-’dren	’gro-drug	rang-grol
).	See	Appendix
One.
8
	
The	belief	in	the	notion	of	the	continuity	of	consciousness	creates	a	very
different	perspective	among	the	bereaved	within	Buddhist	communities.
Although	grief	is	not	repressed,	the	family	members	and	friends	are	encouraged
to	support	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	by	being	themselves	strong	in	their
spiritual	practice	and	dedicating	this	effort	to	the	deceased.	Sympathy	for	the
spiritual	opportunities	being	presented	to	the	deceased	during	and	after	the	death

process	is	strongly	stressed.	Clinging,	attachment	and	extreme	sorrow	are
discouraged,	whilst	creating	an	atmosphere	of	openness,	compassion	and
acceptance	of	change	is	emphasised	and	highly	valued.
9
	
On	this	interval	following	the	cessation	of	outer	respiration	(
phyi-dbugs
)	and
preceding	the	cessation	of	inner	respiration	(
nang-dbugs
),	see	p.	228.
10
	
The	injunction	not	to	touch	the	body	of	the	deceased	extends	from	the
moment	
when	the	consciousness	enters	the	central	channel	until	the	vital	energy
leaves	the	body;	a	period	of	time	which	can	be	just	a	few	moments	or	up	to	three
days.	This	injunction	is	often	repeated	in	the	present	text	and	stressed	by	Tibetan
lamas	who	explain	that	touching	the	body	draws	the	mindfulness	of	the
individual	to	the	place	being	touched.	Since	the	point	on	the	body	from	which
the	consciousness	exits	is	related	to	the	quality	of	the	mental	realm	into	which	it
may	enter,	drawing	the	mindfulness	by	touching	can	be	helpful	or	harmful.	See
above,	Ch.	10,	p.	214.
11
	
Traditionally,	every	Tibetan	household	has	a	shrine	which	is	the	focus	of	the
household’s	daily	ritual	and	devotional	activity.	At	the	time	of	a	bereavement
various	ancillary	rituals	are	also	performed	together	with	the	reading	of	this
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
.	Often	a	tent	is	erected	in	the	garden	and	a	large
altar	laid	out.	There	is	much	activity,	involving	both	the	family	and	the	attending
monks,	in	making	the	preparations	for	the	rituals.	The	sense	of	bewilderment	at
the	death	of	a	loved	one	is	strongly	tempered	by	the	purposefulness	in	the
activity	directed	at	supporting	and	inspiring	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased.