tions
Is	like	a	thunderbolt,	it	is	extremely	powerful.
And	even	though	we	feel	remorse,	it	will	be	of	no	help	-
We	will	not	be	able	to	escape!
The	punishment	for	negative	actions	is	exacted	by	Yama.
In	this	dangerous	passageway,	traversed	by	all,
The	executors	of	Yama’s	rites	bring	us	to	trial.
Pity	those	human	beings	who	do	not	avoid	negativity	-
For	there	is	no	way	to	help	them.
How	severe	is	the	attitude	of	Dharmarāja!
How	precise	is	the	accounting	of	the	deity	and	demon	of	conscience!
How	remorseful	are	the	great	wrongdoers!
Only	by	engaging	in	virtue,	will	one	proceed	to	higher	rebirths.
Alas!	The	body	ages	day	by	day.
The	lifespan	is	consumed	moment	by	moment.
Dying	in	turn,	one	after	another,
Sentient	beings	of	this	errant	degenerate	age
Have	lifespans	shorter	than	the	tail	of	a	sheep!
All	householders	with	many	dependants,	[such	as	this	wrongdoer],
Will	reap	the	fruits	of	their	evil	past	actions	in	so	many	ways,
And	even	their	relatives	and	friends	will	[one	day]	arise	as	their	enemies.
In	these	bad	times,	keeping	a	household	[can	in	itself]	engender	sorrow.
Now,	[therefore],	having	attained	a	human	body,
Endowed	with	freedom	and	favourable	opportunities,
Direct	your	thought	towards	your	own	mind!
The	critical	point	is	to	concentrate	on	the	sacred	teachings!
Then,	you	will	be	happy	in	this	life	and	joyful	in	the	next.
ACT	TWO
(
Then	again,	[in	the	masked	drama	of	rebirth],	when	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta	is
shown	setting	off	for	the	realms	of	higher	rebirth,	he	prays	in	the	presence	of
Avalokiteśvara,	and	after	[Dharmarāja]	has	finished	reciting	the	aspirational
prayer	of	Avalokiteśvara	on	behalf	of	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	the	householder	is	adorned	with
fine	ornaments,	and	installed	upon	a	throne.	Then,	before	the	multitude	of	the

five	hosts	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s	arrive	to	welcome	him	with	music	and	song,	at	that	time,	the
deity	of	good	conscience	should	joyfully	make	the	following	prayer,	telling	of	the
advantages	of	abandoning	negativity	and	practising	virtue.
5
	)
	
THE	DEITY	REPRESENTING	THE	GOOD	CONSCIENCE:
I	pray	to	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
Who	abide	in	Akaniṣṭha,	the	palace	of	reality’s	expanse!
I	pray	to	Vajradhara,	[lord	of]	the	sixth	[enlightened	family],
Who	abides	in	the	Buddha	field	of	the	Dense	Array.
I	pray	to	the	Teacher	Vajrasattva,
Who	abides	in	the	Buddha	field	of	Abhirati.
I	pray	to	the	awareness	holder	Prahevajra,
Who	abides	in	the	maṇḍala	of	spiralling	rainbow	lights!
6
I	pray	to	the	learned	Śr
ῑ
	Siṃha,
Who	abides	in	the	assembly	hall	of	Dhanakośa.
I	pray	to	Padmākara	of	Oḍḍiyāna,
Who	abides	in	the	celestial	palace	of	Lotus	Light!
I	pray	to	the	ḍākin
ῑ
	Yeshe	Tsogyal,
Who	abides	in	the	pure	palace	of	the	sky-farers!
I	pray	to	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa,
Who	abides	in	the	buddha	field	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation!
I	pray	to	his	spiritual	son	Nyinda	Choje,
Who	abides	in	the	limitless	palace	of	the	[sacred]	teachings!
I	pray	to	the	peerless	Sūryacandra,
Who	abides	in	the	palace	where	the	benefit	of	living	beings	is	spontaneously
accomplished!
I	pray	to	the	precious	root	spiritual	teacher,
Seated	on	a	sun	and	moon	cushion	above	the	crown	of	my	head!
7
I	pray	to	the	infinitude	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	meditational	Deities,
Who	abide	in	the	maṇḍala	of	the	Conquerors,	which	is	one’s	own	body!
8
I	pray	to	the	protectors	of	the	[sacred]	teachings	Magon	Chamdrel,
Who	abide	in	the	palace	of	the	transmitted	precepts	and	commitments!
	
How	wonderful!
At	this	time	when	we	have	obtained	a	human	body,
Endowed	with	freedom	and	favourable	opportunities,

How	amazing	are	our	positive	virtues!
At	this	time	when	our	five	sense-faculties	are	intact,
How	amazing	it	is	to	be	attracted	by	the	[sacred]	teachings!
At	this	time	when	we	have	encountered	the	Buddha’s	teaching,
How	amazing	it	is	to	abandon	non-virtue	and	negativity!
At	this	time	when	we	possess	illusory	wealth	and	property,
How	wonderful	it	is	to	offer	these	upwards	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels	and
downwards	as	charity!
Once	we	ha