ing’.
Since	all	who	hear	it	read	aloud	can	attain	buddhahood,
It	is	called	the	‘Liberation	by	Hearing’.
Since	all	who	feel	its	breath	can	attain	buddhahood,
It	is	called	the	‘Liberation	by	Feeling’.
	
Since	there	has	never	been	a	single	buddha	who	did	not	see	[this	mantra
circle],
It	is	indeed	the	nucleus	of	the	[sacred]	teachings.
All	who	see	it	being	inscribed	will	attain	buddhahood,
All	who	come	into	contact	with	it,	by	wearing	it,	will	attain	buddhahood.
All	who	hear	it	read	aloud	will	attain	buddhahood.
Therefore,	it	should	be	inscribed	and	worn	[as	an	amulet].
It	should	be	read	aloud	and	contemplated	in	the	appropriate	way,
And	it	should	be	thoroughly	comprehended	in	every	respect!
	
Except	for	those	fortunate	ones,	with	appropriate	past	actions,
[This	mantra	circle]	should	be	kept	secret	and	concealed,
Because	 those	 who	 have	 not	 accumulated	 merit	 cannot	 comprehend	 [its

meaning],
And	if	they	were	to	defame	this	[mantra	circle],	they	would	proceed	to	the
hells.
This	is	like	an	anguished	spirit	seeing	[nutritious]	food	as	an	enemy!
Therefore,	it	should	be	kept	as	a	secret,	esoteric	instruction.
[This	mantra	circle]	is	a	field	of	experience	of	the	fortunate.
It	is	extremely	difficult	to	encounter	this	[mantra	circle],
And	once	encountered,	it	is	difficult	to	mentally	comprehend.
Therefore,	those	who	do	encounter	it	should	rejoice,
And	embrace	it	with	respect!
	
At	the	time	of	death	[this	mantra	circle]	should	not	be	removed	from	the	body,
And	when	cremation	takes	place	it	should	not	be	removed	from	the	corpse.
As	a	consequence,	liberation	may	occur	through	seeing,	hearing,	recollection
or	contact.
	
This	completes	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-
physical	Aggregates
,
Which	encompasses	[the	mantras	of]	the	hundred	enlightened	families	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
	
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya	a	gter-rgya
	
This	is	a	discovered	text	extracted	from	Mount	Gampodar	by	the	treasure-finder
Karma	Lingpa.
	
ŚUBHAṂ

Appendix	One:	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	and	the
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
A	 correspondence	 between	 the	 chapters	 of	 Karma	 Lingpa’s	
Peaceful	 and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
	(Dudjom	Rinpoche	three-volume
edition,	Delhi:	Sherab	Lama,	1975-6)	and	the	chapters	of	this	book
History	(
lo-rgyus
)
1)	
Memorandum
	(
Them-byad	zin-bris
),	composed	by	Gyarawa	Namka	Chokyi
Gyeltsen,	Volume	1,	pp.	1-6.
2)	
Legend	 of	 King	 ’Gyod	 tshangs
	 (
’Gyod-tshangs	 rgyal-po’i	 lo-rgyus
).
Volume	1,	pp.	7-13.
3)	
Legend	of	the	Brahmin	Dung-phreng
	(
Bram-ze	dung-phreng-gi	lo-rgyus
).
Volume	1,	pp.	15-20.
4)	
Padmasambhava’s	 Prophecy	 of	 the	 Treasure-finder	 and	 the	 Series	 of
Authentic	Spiritual	Lineage	Holders
	(
gTer-ston	lung-bstan-dang	khungs	btsun-
pa	bla-ma	brgyud-pa’i	rim-pa-rnams
),	composed	by	Gendun	Gyeltsen.	Volume
1,	pp.	21-26.
5)	
Abridged	History	of	the	Lineage	entitled	Jewel	Garland
	(
rGyud-pa’i	lo-
rgyus	 bsdus-pa	 nor-bu’i	 phreng-ba
),	 composed	 by	 Namka	 Chokyi	 Gyatso.
Volume	1,	pp.	27-48.
Empowerment	(
dbang-bskur
)
1)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Encountering	the	Four	Empowerments:	The
Extensive	and	Elaborate	Empowerment	of	the	Vase
	(
dBang-bzhi	’phrad-tshad
rang-grol-gyi	spros-bcas	bum-dbang	chen-mo
).	Volume	1,	pp.	49-92.
2)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Encountering	the	Four	Empowerments:	The
Extraordinary	 Profound	 Elucidation	 of	 the	 Three	 Higher	 Empowerments
Including	the	Natural	Liberation	Through	the	Secret	Empowerment	of	Great

Bliss
	(
dBang-bzhi	’phrad-tshad	rang-grol-gyi	gsang-dbang	bde-chen	rang-grol-
la-sogs-pa’i	dbang	gong-ma	gsum-gyi	zab-gsal	khyad-par-can
).	Volume	1,	pp.
93-125.
3)	
Natural	Liberation	through	the	Propelling	of	the	Six	Classes	of	Beings	into
Higher	Rebirth:	The	[Middle-Length]	Empowerments	of	the	Natural	Liberation
of	 Degenerated	 Commitments	 Through	 Reparation	 and	 Confession
	 (
sKong-
bshags	
nyams-chags	rang-grol-gyi	db