ppy	states.	[In	the	case	of	those	individuals

who	are	indifferent	or	deluded,	who	have	been	neither	virtuous	nor	negative,	one
will	experience	neither	pleasure	nor	pain,	but	only	an	apathetic	delusion.]
14
Whichever	of	these	happens,	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	whatever	objects	of
desire	or	blissful	or	happy	states	appear	before	you,	do	not	be	attached	to	them.
Do	not	cling	to	them!	Be	free	from	attachment	and	clinging	and	mentally	offer
these	[experiences]	to	your	spiritual	teacher	and	to	the	[Three]	Precious	Jewels.
Particularly,	if	these	visions	are	of	indifference,	devoid	of	happiness	or	pain,
abide	 in	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 Great	 Seal,	 where	 awareness	 is	 [naturally
present],	without	meditation	and	without	distraction.	This	is	very	important.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	at	this	time,	you	will	try	to	find	shelter	[from	the
hurricane	of	past	actions]	below	bridges,	in	mansions,	in	temples	or	grass-huts
or	beside	stūpas	and	so	forth,	but	this	[shelter]	will	be	momentary,	it	will	not
last.	Your	awareness,	now	separated	from	your	body,	will	not	rest	and	you	will
feel	reckless,	angry	and	afraid.	Your	consciousness	will	be	faltering,	superficial,
and	nebulous.	Again	you	will	realise:	‘Alas!	I	am	dead,	what	should	I	do	now?’
Reflecting	on	this,	your	consciousness	will	grow	sad,	your	heart	will	be	chilled
and	you	will	feel	intense	and	boundless	misery.	Your	mind	is	being	compelled	to
move	on,	without	settling	in	one	place.	Do	not	indulge	in	all	kinds	of	memories!
Let	your	awareness	rest	in	an	undistracted	state!
[The	time	will	come	when	you	will	realise	that]	you	have	no	food,	except	that
which	has	been	dedicated	to	you.	As	for	companionship,	[here],	similarly,	there
will	 be	 no	 certainty.	 These	
are	 both	 indications	 that	 the	 mental	 body	 is
wandering	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	Your	present	feelings	of	happiness
and	sorrow	are	[now]	driven	by	your	past	actions.
[Once	again],	seeing	your	homeland,	circle	of	friends,	relatives	and	even	your
own	corpse,	you	will	realise:	‘I	am	dead!	What	should	I	do	now?’	You	will	feel
deeply	saddened	[by	your	existence]	in	a	mental	body,	and	wish,	‘O	that	I	might
obtain	a	physical	body!’	Consequently,	you	will	experience	roaming	here	and
there	in	search	of	a	body.	You	might	even	attempt,	many	times,	to	re-enter	your
own	body,	but	a	long	time	has	already	elapsed	in	the	[previous]	intermediate
state	of	reality.	In	winter	your	body	will	have	frozen,	in	summer	it	will	have
decayed.	Alternatively,	your	relatives	will	have	cremated	it,	buried	it	in	a	grave,
or	offered	it	to	the	birds	and	wild	animals.	Not	finding	a	way	back,	you	will	feel
utterly	distressed,	and	you	will	certainly	feel	yourself	[trying	to]	squeeze	[into
the	crevices]	between	stones	and	rocks.	Torments	such	as	these	will	enfold	you.
This	being	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth,	so	long	as	you	search	for	a	body,	you
will	experience	nothing	but	suffering.	Therefore	give	up	your	clinging	to	a	body

and	rest	in	a	state	of	non-activity,	[undistractedly].
	
Liberation	can	be	obtained	in	the	intermediate	state,	as	a	result	of	the	above
introduction.	However,	even	though	this	introduction	is	given,	due	to	negative
past	 actions,	 recognition	 may	 not	 occur.	 So	 again,	 you	 should	 call	 to	 the
deceased	by	name	and	say	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
	(call	to	the	deceased	by	name)
,	listen	[to	me].	It	is
due	to	your	own	past	actions	that	you	are	now	suffering	in	this	way.	No	one	else
is	responsible	-	this	is	solely	the	result	of	your	own	past	actions.	Pray	ardently
now	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels.	They	will	protect	you.	If	you	do	not	pray
intensely	now,	especially	if	you	do	not	know	how	to	meditate	on	the	Great	Seal,
or	if	you	cannot	meditate	on	a	meditational	deity,	the	‘innate	good	conscience’
within	you
15
	
will	now	gather	together	all	your	virtuous	actions,	counting	them
out	with	white	pebbles,	and	the	‘innate	bad	conscience’	within	you	will	gather
together	all	your	non-virtuous	actions,	cou