ial	to	view	our	experience	more	insightfully,	is	a	powerful	method	of
releasing	us	from	the	dissonant	and	perhaps	even	fearful	qualities	of	our	own
self-made,	perceptual	landscape.
Chapters	1-7	provide	us	with	a	framework	for	achieving	this	release	in	our
daily	lives.	Chapter	1	poetically	evokes	the	perspectives	that	may	lead	us	to
realise	 that	 understanding	 our	 actual	 nature	 and	 understanding	 our	 current
condition	as	human	beings	are	worthwhile,	Chapters	2-6	offer	us	methods	for
training	our	minds	to	instinctively	recognise	the	actual	nature	of	our	being	and
existence,	and	Chapter	7	provides	a	framework	for	modulating	and	refining	our
motivation,	perspectives	and	actions.
It	is	undeniably	the	case	that	in	our	society	we	do	not	easily	accept	that	death
is	a	natural	part	of	life,	which	results	in	a	perpetual	sense	of	insecurity	and	fear,
and	many	are	confused	at	the	time	of	the	death	of	a	loved	one,	not	knowing	what
they	can	do	to	help	the	one	that	has	passed	away	or	how	to	address	their	own
grief.	Exploring	ways	of	overcoming	our	fear	of	death	and	adopting	a	creative
approach	 at	 the	 time	 of	 bereavement,	 that	 is,	 focusing	 one’s	 energy	 on
supporting	the	one	that	has	passed	away,	are	both	extraordinary	benefits	of	the
insights	and	practices	that	are	so	beautifully	expressed	in	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
.
When	I	think	of	these	things	I	often	remember	the	Dalai	Lama	saying:	‘When
we	look	at	life	and	death	from	a	broader	perspective,	then	dying	is	just	like
changing	our	clothes!	When	this	body	becomes	old	and	useless,	we	die	and	take
on	a	new	body,	which	is	fresh,	healthy	and	full	of	energy!	This	need	not	be	so
bad!’
	

Graham	Coleman	
Thimpu,	Bhutan

A	Brief	Literary	History	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
by	Gyurme	Dorje
	
	
	
Since	the	publication	in	1927	of	Lama	Kazi	Dawa	Samdup	and	W.	Y.	Evans-
Wentz’s	pioneering	English	translation	of	three	chapters	from	the	cycle	of	texts
known	 in	 the	 original	 Tibetan	 as	
The	 Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing	 in	 the
Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
),	the	chapters	they	translated,
dealing	with	the	nature	of	the	after-death	state,	including	the	accompanying
aspirational	prayers,	have	attracted	a	compelling	interest	outside	Tibet	under	the
title	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead.
	Learned	Tibetans	today	often	express	their
surprise	 that	 this	 particular	 collection	 of	 meditative	 practices	 concerning
methods	for	understanding	the	nature	of	mind	and	transforming	our	experiences
throughout	the	round	of	life	and	death	has	become	one	of	the	most	well	known
of	all	the	works	of	Tibetan	literature	in	translation.	This	renown	is	especially
unexpected	when	one	considers	the	esoteric	origins	of	the	text	and	its	highly
restricted	 transmission	 within	 Tibet	 until	 the	 mid-fifteenth	 century.	 It	 is	 on
account	of	this	widespread	popular	recognition	however	that	the	title	coined	by
the	 editor	 of	 the	 first	 translation,	 Evans-Wentz,	 has	 been	 retained	 in	 all
subsequent	translations	and	related	studies.	Following	in	this	tradition,	we	too
have	retained	the	title	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	to	refer	to	the	first	complete
English	translation	of	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate
States
,	 which	 includes	 translations	 of	 all	 twelve	 chapters	 of	 the	 original
compilation.
EARLY	ORIGINS
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
	is	an	outstanding
example	of	Nyingma	literature.	The	Nyingmapa	are	the	followers	of	the	oldest
of	all	the	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism,	
tracing	their	lineage	back	to	the	first

wave	of	transmission	of	the	Buddhist	teachings	to	Tibet,	to	the	royal	dynastic
period	of	Tibetan	history	in	the	eighth	century,	when	great	Indian	masters	such
as	Padmasambhava,	Vimalamitra	and	Buddhaguhya	initially	introduced	the	three
inner	classes	of	tantra:	Mahāyoga,	Anuyoga	and	Atiyoga.	These	tantra	texts	are
differentiated	on	the	basis	of	their	distinctive	meditative	techniques,	known
respectively	as	the	gene