ht	hand	quivers,	one	talks	nonsensically,
And	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	under	the	right	armpit,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	an	antigod.
If	nasal	mucous	and	vital	wind	flow	through	the	left	nostril,
And	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	left	eye,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	a	human	being.
If	animal	sounds	are	emitted	from	the	mouth,	urine	is	secreted	from	the
urethra,
And	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	genitals,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	an	animal.
If	the	skin	turns	yellowish	and	lustreless,
And	there	is	salivation,	accompanied	by	sensations	of	hunger,
While	reproductive	fluid	is	secreted,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	reborn	as	an	anguished	spirit.
If	the	right	leg	shakes,	defecation	takes	place,
Anger	is	felt,	and	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	soles	of	the	feet,
It	is	said	that	this	person	will	be	born	in	the	hells.
If	one	experiences	intense	pride,	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	ears,
And	consciousness	is	emitted	via	the	ears,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	a	
yakṣa
.
46
	
If	good	circumstances	prevail	[at	the	time	of	death],
And	if	there	is	minimal	impairment	of	the	vital	organs,	and	clear	mindfulness,
And	if	one’s	spiritual	teacher	and	fellow	practitioners	gather	together,	with	an
inspired	perspective,
And	if	serum	and	other	signs	appear	at	the	crown	of	the	head,
And	consciousness	is	transferred	from	the	crown	of	the	head,
Then,	it	is	said	that	one	will	achieve	liberation,	or	take	birth	among	the	higher
realms.
47
Therefore,	it	is	most	important	[to	create]	the	right	circumstances	at	the	time
of	death.
	
Furthermore,	there	are	indications	and	signs	of	a	higher	or	lower	rebirth
That	arise	after	the	death	of	a	sentient	being.

These	relate	to	changes	occurring	in	the	sky,	which	should	be	examined	over
[an	appropriate]	number	of	days:
If	the	sky	turns	dark	brown,	or	vaporous	[clouds]	well	up,
Or	if	there	are	winds,	chilling	breezes,	blizzards	and	so	forth,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	hell
realms.
If	a	lustreless	mist	hangs	in	the	sky,	and	the	sun	and	moon	fade,
If	there	is	no	wind	or	breeze,	and	the	sun	is	obscured,
Or	if	there	are	traces	of	rain,	or	else	if	it	rains	in	the	evening,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	realms	of
anguished	spirits.
If	the	sky	turns	brownish,	and	there	is	unbroken	black	cloud,
Or	if	there	is	a	mist	and	an	unpleasantly	brown	sky,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	animal
realms.
If	the	clouds	in	the	sky	turn	yellowish	black	and	assume	terrifying	forms,
And	hurtle	fiercely	back	and	forth,	driven	by	the	wind,
Or	if	there	is	thunder	and	lightning,	and	the	sun	and	moon	become	invisible,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	antigod
realms.
If	the	sky	is	bright	and	the	sun	and	moon	are	clearly	visible,
[Or	the	atmosphere	is]	utterly	clear,	without	wind	or	breeze,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	god
realms.
If	the	sky	is	bright	and	clear,	and	fine	white	silken	clouds	appear,
Or	if	the	sun	and	moon	are	encircled	by	aureoles	of	light,
All	these	are	the	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	human
realms.
	
Whichever	of	the	above	indications	arise,
They	signify	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	in	one	or	other	of	the	six
[mundane]	realms.
These	[signs]	will	occur	either	two,	three,	or	seven	days	after	death,
As	it	is	explained	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Cremation	of	Corpses
.
48
	
The	indications	that	one	has	attained	the	three	buddha-bodies	with	a	pure

rebirth,
Or	that	one	has	attained	liberation	in	the	manner	of	the	sky-farers,
Are	explained	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Cremation	of	Corpses
,	and	in	the	
Liberation
by	Wearing
.
49
One	should	therefore	consult	these	sources	in	detail.
CONCLUSION
Since	living	beings	do	not	know	when	they	will	die,
These	signs	of	death	should	be	looked	for	again	and	again.
When	the	signs	occur,	indicating	that	one	is	certainly	to	die,
Then