by	sustaining	mindfulness	[of	the	teaching],	the
deceased	is	capable	of	transforming	his	or	her	perception	in	an	instant.	This	is
why	[the	reminder	of	the	teaching]	is	extremely	beneficial.	Its	impact	is	like	that
of	a	catapult	machine;	in	other	words,	it	resembles	the	way	in	which	a	huge	tree-
trunk,	 incapable	 of	 being	 lifted	 by	 a	 hundred	 men,	 can	 be	 easily	 steered

wherever	one	wants	in	a	moment,	when	it	is	floated	in	water.	[In	essence,	the
impact	of	hearing	this	doctrine]	resembles	the	turning	of	a	horse	by	its	bridle.
All	those	who	have	died	should	be	approached	in	the	manner	[here	described].
If	the	corpse	is	present,	then	a	friend	should	sit	close	to	it	and	repeatedly	read
aloud	this	succinct	reminder.	This	reading	should	continue	[at	least]	until	blood
and	serum	emerge	from	the	nostrils	[of	the	deceased];	and	until	then,	the	corpse
must	not	be	disturbed.
The	 commitments	 which	 relate	 to	 this	 practice	 are	 as	 follows:	 no	 living
creatures	should	be	killed	in	dedication	to	the	dead	person;	relatives	and	friends,
whether	oneself	or	others,	should	not	cry,	shout,	mourn	or	wail	in	the	presence	of
the	corpse;	and	instead	should	engage	in	as	much	virtuous	activity	as	possible.
Further,	it	would	be	extremely	beneficial	if	this	[sacred]	teaching	of	the	
Great
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
	is	recited	as	a	complement	to
[other	 systems	 of]	 meditative	 guidance,	 irrespective	 of	 the	 category	 of	 the
[sacred]	teachings	to	which	they	belong.
Further,	this	text	should	be	recited	constantly.	Its	words	and	meaning	should
be	 learnt	 by	 heart.	 Then,	 if	 one’s	 health	 permits,	 when	 [the	 onset	 of]	 the
intermediate	 state	 of	 the	 time	 of	 death	 becomes	 certain,	 and	 the	 signs	 of
[approaching]	death	are	recognised,	one	should	read	this	text	aloud	to	oneself,
and	reflect	on	its	words	and	meaning.	If	one’s	health	does	not	allow	this,	then
entrust	the	book	to	a	fellow	Buddhist	for	him	or	her	to	read	aloud.	The	
reminder
thus	being	made,	there	is	no	doubt	that	liberation	will	assuredly	be	attained.
This	teaching,	which	does	not	necessarily	require	[prior]	meditation	practice,
is	the	profound	instruction	which	liberates	by	being	seen,	liberates	by	being
heard	and	liberates	by	being	read	aloud.	This	profound	instruction	is	one	which
can	lead	even	those	of	the	greatest	negativity	on	the	direct	path	[to	liberation].
Ensure	that	its	words	and	meaning	are	retained	in	the	memory	[such	that]	they
are	not	forgotten,	even	if	you	were	to	be	chased	by	seven	[ferocious]	dogs.	This
is	a	pith	instruction	for	the	attainment	of	buddhahood	at	the	time	of	death.	[Even
if]	all	the	buddhas	of	the	past,	present	and	future	[were	to	search],	they	would
not	find	a	[sacred]	teaching	superior	to	this.
This	 completes	 the	 instruction	 on	 the	 intermediate	 state,	 which	 liberates
corporeal	beings,	the	profound,	refined	essence,	entitled	the	
Great	Liberation	by
Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
.	It	was	brought	forth	from	the	mountain	of
Gampodar	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa,	as	a	precious	treasure.
MAṄGALAM!

12
Aspirational	Prayers
CONTEXT
If	possible,	the	dying	person	should	recite	these	three	aspirational	prayers
with	intense	longing	at	the	time	of	death.
Otherwise,	the	attending	lama	should	recite	these	prayers,	also	with
intense	longing,	immediately	before	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
	
(Chapter
11)	is	read	to	the	dying	person.	That	is,	following	the	taking	of	refuge	in
the	Three	Precious	Jewels	-	the	Buddha,	the	sacred	teachings	and	the
monastic	community	-	and	the	making	of	offerings.
At	this	time,	when	it	is	likely	that	the	dying	person’s	consciousness	is
dimmed	and	the	dying	person	may	be	feeling	afraid,	it	is	regarded	as
crucially	important	for	the	dying	person	to	place	their	confidence	in	the
buddhas	and	bodhisattvas	and	to	request	the	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas	to
be	their	refuge	and	guide.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas
and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assis