d	
embraced	by	his	consort	Ākāśadhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ.
	A	blue	luminosity,	radiant
and	clear,	bright	and	dazzling,	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s
expanse,	which	is	the	natural	purity	of	your	aggregate	of	consciousness,	[will
emanate]	 from	 the	 heart	 of	 Vairocana	 and	 his	 consort,	 and	 it	 will	 shine
piercingly	before	you	[at	the	level	of	your	heart,	with	such	brilliance]	that	your
eyes	 cannot	 bear	 it.	 Together	 with	 this	 [luminosity],	 a	 dull	 white	 light,
[indicative	of	the	realm]	of	the	gods,	will	also	dawn	directly	before	you	[and
touch	your	heart].	At	this	time,	under	the	sway	of	negative	past	actions,	you	will
[wish	to]	flee	in	fear	and	terror	from	the	bright	blue	light,	which	is	the	pristine
cognition	of	reality’s	expanse,	and	you	will	come	to	perceive	the	dull	white	light
of	the	god	[realms]	with	delight.	At	this	moment,	do	not	be	awed	by	the	blue
luminosity,	which	is	radiant	and	dazzling,	clear	and	very	bright.	This	is	the
supreme	inner	radiance	[of	pristine	cognition]!	Do	not	be	terrified!	This	is	the
light	ray	of	the	Tathāgata,	which	is	called	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s
expanse.
43
	
Have	confidence	in	it!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing	devotion!	Pray,
with	 devotion,	 thinking:	 ‘This	 is	 the	 light	 ray	 of	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Vairocana’s	 compassion.	 I	 take	 refuge	 in	 it.’	 For	 this,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the
transcendent	 lord	 Vairocana	 and	 his	 consort	 come	 to	 escort	 you	 on	 the
dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate	state.	This	is	the	light	ray	of	Vairocana’s
compassion!	Therefore	do	not	delight	in	the	dull	white	light	of	the	god	[realms]!
Do	not	be	attached	to	it!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	This	dull	white	light	is	the	inviting
path	created	by	your	own	habitual	tendencies	for	deep	delusion,	which	you
yourself	have	generated.
44
	
If	you	become	attached	to	it,	you	will	roam	within	the

god	realms	and	be	drawn	into	[the	cycles	of	existence	of]	the	six	classes	of
beings.	[This	dull	light]	is	an	obstruction	blocking	the	path	to	liberation.	Do	not
look	at	it!	Be	devoted	to	the	bright	blue	light!	Focus	intently	on	the	transcendent
lord	Vairocana	and	repeat	after	me	the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	delusion,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Vairocana	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s	expanse.
May	the	supreme	consort	[Ākāśa]dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	Vairocana	and	his	consort,	and	you	will	attain
buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the	central	Buddha
field	of	the	Dense	Array
	
(
Ghanavyūha
).
	
If,	however,	even	after	receiving	this	introduction,	as	the	result	of	negative
obscuration	and	aversion,	[the	deceased]	are	nonetheless	overawed	by	the	lights
and	rays,	and	turn	away,	and	even	if,	after	repeating	the	aspirational	prayer,	they
remain	bewildered,	then,	on	the	second	day,	Vajrasattva’s	assembly	of	deities
will	come	to	escort	them,	and,	at	that	same	time,	the	negative	past	actions	which
are	conducive	to	a	rebirth	in	the	hell	[realms]	will	also	emerge.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	second	day	the
purity	of	the	entire	element	water	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	white	light.	At	that
time,	from	the	eastern	Buddha	field	of	Manifest	Joy
	(
Abhirati
)
,	the	transcendent
lord	Akṣobhya-Vajrasattva	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	blue	in	colour,	holding
in	his	[right]	hand	a	five-pronged	vajra,	seated	on	an	elephant	throne	and
embraced	 by	 his	 consort	 Buddhalocanā.	 They	 are	 encircled	 by	 two	 male
bodhisattvas,	Kṣitigarbha	and	Maitreya