aring	with	bulging	eyes
To	stir	the	pit	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	white-yellow,	vulture-headed	Gṛdhramukh
ῑ
,

Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Clawing	a	bloated	corpse,	and	extracting	the	entrails
To	sever	the	three	poisons	from	their	roots.
	
I	bow	down	to	red-black,	kite-headed	Kaṅkamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Carrying	a	bloated	corpse,	draped	over	her	shoulder
To	extract	[beings]	from	the	pit	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	black,	crow-headed	Kākamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Brandishing	a	sword,	and	drinking	blood	from	a	skull
To	consume	and	liberate	dissonant	mental	states.
	
I	bow	down	to	blue-black,	owl-headed	Ulūkamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Holding	an	iron	hook,
9
	and	carrying	a	blood-filled	skull
To	draw	[beings]	free	from	the	false	mentality	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	horse-headed	Aṅkuśā	at	the	eastern	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Horse-headed,	white,	and	holding	an	iron	hook,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	compassion
Guiding	[those	trapped	in]	cyclic	existence	away	from	the	lower	realms.
	
I	bow	down	to	sow-headed	Pāśā	at	the	southern	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Sow-headed,	yellow,	and	holding	a	noose,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	loving	kindness
Constricting	the	false	mentality	[of	beings].
I	bow	down	to	lion-headed	Sphoṭā	at	the	western	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Lion-headed,	red,	and	holding	an	iron	chain,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	sympathetic	joy
Shackling	the	dissonant	mental	states	generated	by	ignorance.
10
	

I	bow	down	to	snake-headed	Gaṇṭhā	at	the	northern	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Snake-headed,	green,	and	holding	a	bell,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	equanimity
Subduing	the	cognitive	resonances	of	the	five	poisons.
11
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Casts	a	Noose,
12
Manifestation	of	the	natural	purity	of	reality,
Clothed	in	flayed	hides,	she	unites	the	three	levels	of	existence
With	the	[pure	buddha]	fields,	however	these	may	manifest,
And	casts	her	noose	of	solar	rays,
Projecting	[beings	of]	the	trichiliocosm	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Casts	a	Pike,
13
[Holding]	a	blood-filled	skull,	and	casting	a	pike,
She	purifies	the	five	dissonant	mental	states
To	dispel	permanently	the	diseases	of	conceptual	thought,
The	force	of	her	compassion,	rich	in	skilful	means,
Projecting	human	beings	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Rings	a	Bell,
14
Holding	to	her	heart	a	blood-filled	skull,
She	subjugates	the	entire	trichiliocosm
To	secure	ignorant	sentient	beings	in	[reality’s]	expanse,
The	resonance	of	her	charisma
Projecting	[beings	of]	the	chiliocosm	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Carries	a	Garuḍa,
15
Her	body	an	exquisite	white-yellow,
[Signifying]	her	proficiency	in	the	rites	of	pacification	and	enrichment.
Holding	to	her	heart	a	blood-filled	skull
To	overpower	the	five	sensory	desires,
She	carries	a	vajra	and	a	large	garuḍa,
Projecting	the	gods	into	higher	rebirths.
	

I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Casts	a	Shooting	Star,
16
Her	awesome	body	an	exquisite	blue-black,
[Holding]	a	vajra	and	casting	a	shooting	star
To	avert	the	intensity	of	‘The	Great	Battle’,
17
She	drinks	blood	from	a	skull,
Projecting	the	antigods	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Holds	a	Thunderbolt-garland,
18
Her	body	part	red	and	part	black,
[Signifying	proficiency	in	the	rites	of]	subjugation	and	wrath,
Her	facial	expression	fixed	in	domination.
To	purify	and	ease	outer	and	inner	obscurations,
[She	wields]	a	vajra	and	thunderbolt-garland,
Projecting	anguished	spirits	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Wields	an	Eagle-feathered	Banner,
19
H