hy	at	Cambridge	in	1989.	Jinpa	translated	the	Dalai	Lama’s	Introductory

Commentary	and	reviewed	every	line	and	word	of	all	fourteen	chapters	of	the
edited	translation	with	me	twice,	in	the	course	of	which	he	made	countless
important	and	inspiring	suggestions.	Everyone	who	knows	Jinpa’s	work	is	aware
of	his	special	talent	and	skill	both	as	a	translator	and	writer	and	these	have
played	an	invaluable	role	in	this	project.	Finally,	the	individual	introductions	to
each	of	the	chapters,	except	Chapter	11,	were	written	by	Dasho	Sangay	Dorji,	a
Bhutanese	scholar,	who	comes	from	a	family	whose	paternal	line	has	been
lineage	holders	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	for	several	generations	and	who
throughout	his	childhood	accompanied	his	father	every	time	he	was	called	to	a
household	to	carry	out	these	practices.
Needless	to	say	it	has	been	a	wonderful	privilege	for	us	to	work	with	all	those
who	helped	to	make	this	project	possible.	Our	insights	and	skills	as	writers
would	not	even	register	on	the	most	sensitive	of	detectors	compared	to	those	of
the	composers	of	the	original	cycle	of	teachings	or	the	lineage	holders	who	gave
the	 commentarial	 explanation	 that	 guided	 us.	 Throughout	 this	 endeavour
therefore	we	have	tried	to	substitute	hard	work	and	attention	to	detail	for	our
lack	of	ability	and	to	let	the	original	magnificence	of	the	text	shine	through	the
clouds	of	our	shortcomings	as	much	as	we	were	able.
My	work	on	this	project	would	not	have	been	possible	without	the	life-long
friendship	of	the	Orient	Foundation’s	chairman	David	Lascelles.	It	is	difficult	to
thank	him	enough	for	all	that	he	has	made	possible,	beginning	with	our	work
together	on	the	making	of	our	films	
Tibet:	A	Buddhist	Trilogy
,	in	the	1970s,	and
ever	since.	Two	other	special	friends,	Elinore	Detiger	and	Elsie	Walker	made	it
possible	for	this	project	to	be	initiated,	and	their	kindness	and	confidence,
together	with	that	of	Michael	Baldwin,	will	never	
be	forgotten.	My	sincere
appreciation	goes	also	to	Johnnie	and	Buff	Chace,	Lucinda	Ziesing,	Faith	Bieler,
Lavinia	Currier,	Cynthia	Jurs,	Catherine	Cochran,	Margot	Wilkie,	Basil	Panzer,
Bokara	Patterson	and	Lindsay	Masters	for	their	important	contributions	in	the
early	stages	of	this	work.
At	Gyurme	Dorje’s	request,	Gene	Smith	of	the	Tibetan	Buddhist	Resource
Center	in	New	York	generously	made	available	a	digital	version	of	the	three-
volume	manuscript	from	the	library	of	the	late	
Kyabje
	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	on
which	 our	 translation	 is	 largely	 based.	 HH	 Dilgo	 Khyentse	 Rinpoche	 had
previously	provided	copies	of	the	text	reprinted	under	his	supervision	in	Delhi.
Other	versions	of	the	text	which	we	consulted,	including	the	Varanasi	reprint	and
other	versions	of	Bhutanese	and	Chinese	origin,	are	all	from	Gyurme	Dorje’s
private	collection.	Some	source	materials	were	also	kindly	provided	by	Zenkar

Rinpoche,	Tulku	Jigme	Khyentse,	Dr	Burkhard	Quessel	of	the	British	Library,
and	 Dr	 Fernand	 Meyer	 of	 CNRS	 in	 Paris.	 Gyurme	 Dorje	 also	 especially
acknowledges	the	kindness	and	profound	advice	of	all	of	his	teachers	within	the
Nyingma	 tradition,	 including	 the	 previous	 Kangyur,	 Dudjom	 and	 Dilgo
Khyentse	Rinpoches,	as	well	as	Tulku	Pema	Wangyal	and	Zenkar	Rinpoche,	and
he	thanks	his	wife	Xiaohong	for	all	her	encouragement	and	sustenance	during
the	final	years	of	this	project.
I	am	very	grateful	to	Gillon	Aitken,	my	agent,	for	introducing	this	project	to
Penguin,	our	publishers,	and	to	Simon	Winder,	our	editor	at	Penguin,	for	his
patience	and	unfailing	enthusiasm	during	the	long	genesis	of	this	work.	Our
thanks	go	also	to	Dr	Martin	Boord	and	Andrew	Bell	for	their	proofreading	of	the
text	and	to	Robert	Chilton	for	compiling	the	thematic	index.
	
GRAHAM	COLEMAN	
Bath,	England

Acknowledgements	for	the	Illustrations
The	colour	illustrations	that	appear	in	our	text	have	never	previously	been
published.	The	two	painted	scrolls	depicting	the	Hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities	in	Repkong	style,	which	were	c