in	detail.
CONCLUSION
Since	living	beings	do	not	know	when	they	will	die,
These	signs	of	death	should	be	looked	for	again	and	again.
When	the	signs	occur,	indicating	that	one	is	certainly	to	die,
Then	one	should	renounce	whatever	possessions	one	has,
And	clearly	call	to	mind	the	spiritual	teacher,
One’s	fellow	practitioners,	assembled	around	one,	and	the	oral	teachings.
Especially,	one	should	prepare	to	apply	the	transference	[of	consciousness],
50
And	listen	to	and	reflect	on	the	teaching	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
.
51
	
[However],	when	the	external,	internal,	and	secret	signs	of	death	do	occur,
If	one	does	not	perform	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
,
52
One	will	incur	the	downfall	of	abandoning	the	assemblies	of	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities,
Who	are	the	Conquerors,	present	within	one’s	own	body.
53
As	a	result,	one’s	commitments	will	degenerate,	and	one	will	proceed	to	the
hells.
It	is	said	that	this	is	even	more	negative	than	the	[five]	inexpiable	crimes.
Therefore	 one	 should	 diligently	 persevere	 in	 the	 practices	 of	 the	
Ritual
Deception	of	Death
.
[Furthermore],	if	consciousness	is	transferred	[too	soon],
When	[only]	one	or	other	of	the	external	or	internal	signs	of	death	is	present,
This	is	called	the	‘slaying	of	the	deities’.
One	must	not	allow	this	to	occur,	because	the	downfall	will	be	extremely
great.
But	if	all	the	signs	of	death	are	completely	present,	and	cannot	be	averted,

Then,	 and	 only	 then,	 should	 one	 apply	 the	 instructions	 of	 consciousness
transference.
It	is	said,	in	the	tantras,	with	regard	to	the	advantages	of	the	timely	application
of	consciousness	transference,
That	even	one	who	has	committed	an	inexpiable	crime
Will	proceed	to	higher	rebirths	and	blissful	states,
And	can	attain	liberation,	[through	the	timely	application	of	the	instructions
on	transference].
	
EMA!	I	have	here	presented	the	
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]
the	Visual	Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
,
Which	is	a	supporting	text	to	the	teaching	on	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
,
An	extract	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Pro	found	Sacred
Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened
Intention
.
O	yogins	of	posterity,	comprehend	this	as	it	is!
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
May	[this	teaching]	be	encountered	by	fortunate	beings,
Who	possess	a	[positive]	residue	of	past	actions,
And	who	are	intelligent,	faithful,	persevering,	and	compassionate.
May	[the	activities	associated	with	this	teaching],
The	
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	the	Visual	Indications	and
Signs	of	Death
,	never	be	exhausted
Until	cyclic	existence	has	been	emptied!
	
This	is	a	treasure-teaching	revealed	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa.
May	virtue	prevail!

9
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception	of	Death
CONTEXT
This	is	the	companion	text	to	the	previous	chapter	and	it	describes	the
practices	to	be	followed	in	the	event	that	definitive	signs	indicating	death
are	discerned.
The	general	consolidated	rite	described	in	this	chapter	follows	the
classical	 structure	 of	 many	
Vajrayāna
	 protective	 rituals.	 This
consolidated	rite,	and	similar	rituals,	are	commonly	performed	in	Tibetan
Buddhist	communities	today	by	practitioners,	both	for	their	own	benefit
and	for	the	benefit	of	others.
i
	On	the	other	hand,	the	specific	rites,	related
to	specific	signs,	are	again	idiosyncratic	and	are	not	commonly	practised.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception
of	Death
,
1
	[an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities:	A	Pro	found
Sacred	 Teaching,	 [entitled]	 Natural	 Liberation	 through	 [Recognition	 of]
Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	the	glorious	transcendent	one,	[Vajra]kumāra,	whose	face	frowns
with	wrath!
3
	
The	methods	by	which	death	can	be	averted	and	postponed	should	now	be
explained	in	order	that	living	beings	might	be	released	from	suffering,	and	in
o