r]	death	arise	as	follows:
	
If	one’s	gums	grow	grimy	and	black,
This	is	called	the	‘gathering	of	the	personal	demons	of	the	elements’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nine	days.
If	the	nostrils	sag	inwards	and	deflate,
This	is	called	the	‘blockage	of	the	passageway	of	the	vital	breath’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nine	days.
If	the	limbs	are	subject	to	repeated	fits	of	expansion	and	contraction,
This	is	called	the	‘scaling	of	the	mountain	of	the	elements’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	five	days.
If	the	eyes	stare	fixedly,	without	blinking,
This	is	called	the	‘escape	of	the	mother-like	vital	breath’,
25
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	three	days.
If	the	cheeks	sag	inwards,
This	is	called	the	‘rupture	of	the	edge	of	the	earth	element’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	at	daybreak,	ten	days	later.
If	breathing	is	repeatedly	agitated,
This	is	called	the	‘collision	of	vital	energy	and	mind’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	six	days.
26
If	the	tip	of	the	nose	inclines	to	the	right	or	left,
This	is	called	the	‘cutting	off	of	the	bridge	of	the	nose’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	seven	days.
If	tears	flow	uncontrollably	from	the	eyes,
This	is	called	the	‘impediment’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	five	days.
If	the	right	or	left	cheek	sags	inwards,
This	is	called	the	‘cutting	off	of	the	intervening	muscle’,
And	it	indicates	that	[one	may	die]	after	one	day.
If	the	upper	and	lower	teeth	become	locked,
This	is	called	the	‘blockage	of	the	path	of	the	elements’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	two	and	a	half	days.

If	a	black	spot	appears	on	the	tongue,
It	is	certain	that	one	will	die	after	two	days.
If	the	ears	lie	flat	against	the	head,
This	is	called	the	‘blockage	of	the	stairway	of	the	ears’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	within	half	a	day.
If	the	xiphoid	of	the	chest	sags	inward,
This	is	called	the	‘rupture	of	the	support	of	the	water	element’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	two	weeks.
If	the	hands	shake	for	a	prolonged	time,	when	standing	or	sitting,
One	should	know	that	one	may	quickly	die.
	
Other	signs	of	[near]	death	should	also	be	examined	in	the	following	way:
At	noon	one	should	face	towards	the	south,
Placing	the	elbows	on	the	knees,
Whereupon,	lifting	up	one’s	hand,
One	should	place	[the	wrist]	at	the	point	between	the	eyebrows,
And	focus	both	eyes	upon	one’s	hand.
[The	image	of	the	arm]	will	appear	very	thin,	and	if	it	then	vanishes,
This	is	called	the	‘severing	of	the	bond	between	atmosphere	and	earth’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nineteen	days.
	
[Or	else,	one	should	position	oneself	at	sunrise]	with	a	pool	or	pond	to	the
east,
And	stand	up	and	gaze	at	the	surface	of	a	wall	towards	the	west.
Two	superimposed	shadows	will	appear,	one	above	the	other,
And	if	the	upper	shadow	disappears,
This	is	called	the	‘fall	of	a	rider	on	a	white	lioness	from	the	slopes	of	Mount
Sumeru’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	fifteen	and	a	half	days.
	
[Alternatively,	one	should	examine	irregularities	in	one’s	urine	specimen]:
27
In	the	morning	after	a	night	when	one	has	not	engaged	in	sexual	intercourse,
Drunk	alcohol,	or	talked	excessively,
One	 should	 fill	 a	 clay	 container	 with	 one’s	 [first]	 urine,	 at	 sunrise,	 and
examine	it.
If	[the	urine]	has	a	bluish	or	reddish	vapour	which	then	disappears,

This	is	called	the	‘vanishing	of	the	froth	of	the	ocean’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	will	certainly	die	after	nine	days.
If	the	vapour	is	blackish	and	putrid,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	die	after	one	day.
If	the	vapour	is	red	and	spotted,	one	may	die	after	nine	[days].
	
[Alternatively],	one	should	defecate	at	sunrise,
And	if	no	vapour	arises	from	[the	faeces],
This	is	called	the	‘ceasing	of	monks’	smoke	in	the	cities	of	the	earth	element’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nine	days.
	
[Further],	if,	when	the	[closed]	eyes	are	pressed,	no	circles	of	light	appear,
This	is	called	the	‘setting	of	the	unchanging	sun	at	the	summ