hotomy	between	hope	and
doubt!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	enlightenment,	which	is
untainted!
	

Since	we	have	failed	to	understand	the	truth	of	sameness	with	true	equanimity,
We	have	mistakenly	clung	to	the	permanence	of	relatives	and	friends.
How	totally	mistaken	is	this	mind	of	ignorant	people	[such	as	ourselves]!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
sameness!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	encounter	the	true	meaning	of	reality,
We	have	forsaken	truth	and	persevered	in	non-virtuous	acts.
We	have	forsaken	the	transmitted	precepts	of	the	Teacher	and	
have	been
deceived	by	the	vagaries	of	[mundane]	human	doctrines!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
reality!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	experience	the	natural	liberation	of	pristine	cognition,
which	is	[intrinsic]	awareness,
We	have	forsaken	the	modality	of	intrinsic	awareness,	and	persevered	in
distracted	acts.
Take	pity	on	these	sentient	beings	who	are	devoid	of	such	truthful	experience!
We	 confess	 this	 transgression	 within	 the	 expanse,	 which	 is	 free	 from
distraction!
	
To	the	assembled	deities	of	pristine	cognition,	to	the	protectors	who	uphold
the	commitments,
And	to	those	yogins	who	have	fulfilled	their	commitments	in	accordance	with
the	textual	elucidation,
We	remorsefully	confess	all	our	own	faults,
[We	remorsefully	confess]	all	our	deviations	and	obscurations	generated	by
our	unrealised	view!
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	ALL	THOSE	GONE	TO
BLISS
OṂ	We	pray	to	all	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	throughout	the	three	times,
To	you,	the	conquerors,	and	your	retinues,
And	to	all	who	maintain	the	commitments	of	indestructible	reality,

Please,	each	of	you,	attend	to	us!
	
Having	initially	generated	the	mind	[aspiring]	to	supreme	enlightenment,
In	order	to	actualise	the	indestructible	reality	of	buddha-body,	speech	and
mind,
On	the	enlightened	plain	of	an	accomplished	awareness	holder,
We	have	adopted	numerous	secret	commitments,
Relating	to	both	the	meditational	deities	and	our	vajra-masters,
And	we	have	pledged	not	to	transgress	these	injunctions,	to	which	we	are
bound,
[For	to	do	so]	would	lead	to	a	birth	in	the	hells,
Driven	by	our	past	actions	and	misfortunes.
	
[Nonetheless],	swayed	by	attachment,	aversion,	delusion,	pride,	envy	and	so
forth,
We	have	continued	to	err:
Should	we	have	belittled	the	vajra-master	in	our	hearts,	the	‘lamp	of	the
teaching’,
And	thus	allowed	our	commitments	to	degenerate,
And	should	we	have	harboured	ill	will	and	mistaken	attitudes
Towards	the	vajra-companions	who	share	our	commitments,
For	[whatever]	such	[harm	we	have	thus	created],
We	confess	all	our	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of	buddha-body!
	
Should	we	have	not	clearly	visualised	the	seals	of	the	meditational	deity,
27
Should	we	have	been	deficient	in	our	mantra	recitations	during	our	ritual
service,
Should	we	have	failed	to	carry	out	the	rites	through	which	both	ritual	service
and	attainment	are	fulfilled,
Especially	with	respect	to	the	ritual	offerings	of	six	session	[yoga],
And	should	we	have	been	incapable	of	practising	in	accordance	with	the
teachings	and	the	texts,
We	confess	all	such	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of	buddha-speech!
	
Should	we	have	degraded	the	commitments,	which	the	vajra-master	imparted
as	an	esoteric	instruction	of	buddha-mind,

Commitments	he	orally	seeded	in	our	hearts,	through	the	grace	of	his	loving
kindness,
And	should	we	have	even	transgressed	our	secret	name,
28
	by	divulging	it
carelessly,
We	confess	all	such	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of	buddha-mind!
We	[also]	confess	our	degenerations	of	the	ancillary	commitments,
Caused	by	our	failure	to	realise	the	essential	sameness	of	phenomena.
We	confess	our	degenerations	of	the	commitments	relating	to	ritual	service
and	attainment,
Caused	by	our	falling	into	the	sleep	of	idleness	and	apathy.
We	confess	[each	and	every	one	of	our]	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of
buddha-body,	speech	and	mind,
Caused	by