are	the	means	by	which	the
practitioner	can	cultivate	his	or	her	understanding	of	emptiness,	which	is	an
appreciation	of	the	total	absence	of	inherent	existence	and	self-identity	with
respect	to	all	phenomena.	It	is	an	essential	prerequisite	for	beginning	on	the	path
of	tantra	that	the	practitioner	achieve	a	profound	appreciation	of	both	non-
substantiality	and	its	interdependent	relationship	with	phenomenal	reality.	The
tantras	presuppose	this	understanding,	so	it	is	in	the	sūtras	therefore	that	we	find
the	 extensive	 elucidation	 of	 the	 methods	 for	 developing	 a	 complete
understanding	of	emptiness.
Now,	as	to	the	nature	of	the	understanding	of	emptiness	presupposed	by	the
tantras,	 the	 majority	 of	 masters	 of	 the	 Nyingma,	 Kagyu,	 Sakya	 and	 Gelug
schools	agree	that	this	is	the	view	of	the	Middle	Way	(
madhyamapratipad
)

propounded	in	the	sūtras	and	elucidated	by	Nāgārjuna	in	his	works.	In	the
Dzogchen	view,	however,	there	is	also	a	unique	method	of	explaining	emptiness,
which	 emphasises	 the	 inseparability	 of	 emptiness	 and	 inner	 radiance,	 but
nonetheless,	principally,	this	designation	does	refer	to	emptiness	as	presented	in
Nāgārjuna’s	Middle	Way.
As	 far	 as	 the	 concept	 of	 emptiness	 or	 the	 ultimate	 nature	 of	 reality	 is
concerned	this	is	one	area	where	there	is	an	emerging	convergence	between	the
Buddhist	understanding	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	existence	and	the	evolving
contemporary	scientific	view.	This	convergence	relates	to	the	unfindability	of
entities	when	these	are	analytically	sought.	In	modern	science	the	methods	of
analysis	are	principally	applied	to	investigating	the	nature	of	material	
entities.
Thus,	the	ultimate	nature	of	matter	is	sought	through	a	reductive	process	and	the
macroscopic	world	is	reduced	to	the	microscopic	world	of	particles.	Yet,	when
the	nature	of	these	particles	is	further	examined,	we	find	that	ultimately	their
very	existence	as	objects	is	called	into	question.	This	interface	between	non-
substantiality	and	phenomena	is	a	fundamental	focus	of	Buddhist	philosophical
analysis	and	of	experiential	analysis	through	meditation	on	the	nature	of	mind.
As	is	now	becoming	more	commonly	known	in	the	contemporary	scientific
field,	a	subtle	understanding	of	the	nature	of	the	arising	and	dissolution	of	both
individual	thoughts	and	the	cycles	of	existence	lies	at	the	heart	of	Buddhist
literature	and	practice.
In	summary,	therefore,	even	though	the	stages	of	preparation	for	engaging	in
the	practices	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	are	extensive,	it	is	said	that,	since	the	mode
of	procedure	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	follows	a	very	close	correspondence	to	the
nature	of	existence,	human	beings	of	this	world	are	regarded	as	having	the
perfect	 gross	 and	 subtle	 physiological	 basis	 for	 undertaking	 these	 practices
successfully.
Normally	in	our	lives,	if	we	know	that	we	are	going	to	be	confronted	by	a
difficult	 or	 unfamiliar	 situation,	 we	 prepare	 and	 train	 ourselves	 for	 such	 a
circumstance	in	advance,	so	that	when	this	event	actually	happens	we	are	fully
prepared.	As	I	have	outlined,	the	rehearsal	of	the	processes	of	death,	and	those	of
the	intermediate	state,	and	the	emergence	into	a	future	existence,	lies	at	the	very
heart	of	the	path	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra.	These	practices	are	part	of	my	daily
practice	also	and	because	of	this	I	somehow	feel	a	sense	of	excitement	when	I
think	about	the	experience	of	death.	At	the	same	time,	though,	sometimes	I	do
wonder	whether	or	not	I	will	really	be	able	to	fully	utilise	my	own	preparatory
practices	when	the	actual	moment	of	death	comes!

A	 sense	 of	 uncertainty,	 and	 often	 fear,	 is	 a	 natural	 human	 feeling	 when
thinking	about	the	nature	of	death	and	the	relationship	between	living	and	dying.
It	is	perhaps	not	surprising	therefore	that	the	
Bar-do	Thos-grol	Chen-mo
,	the
Tibetan	 Book	 of	 the	 Dead
,	 a	 treasure-text	 which	 focuses	 on	 this	 important
subject,	has	become	one	of	the	best-known	works	of	Tibetan	literature	in	th