ha-bodies,	you	will	dissolve
inseparably	 within	 the	 lights	 and	 buddha-bodies,	 and	 buddhahood	 will	 be
attained.	 O	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 whatever	 fearsome	 and	 terrifying
apparitions	appear	to	you	now,	recognise	them	to	be	natural	manifestations	[of
actual	 reality].	 Do	 not	 be	 afraid!	 Recognise	 these	 [appearances]	 as	 inner
radiance,	your	own	natural	luminosity.	Upon	recognition,	you	will	undoubtedly
attain	 buddhahood,	 right	 now.	 That	 which	 is	 called	 ‘instantaneous	 perfect
buddhahood’	will	occur	at	this	very	moment.	Remember	this,	and	hold	it	in	your
mind!
Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	not	recognise	[the	visionary	appearances]
now,	and	continue	to	be	afraid,	then	all	the	buddha-bodies	of	the	peaceful	deities
will	arise	in	the	form	of	Mahākāla;	all	the	buddha-bodies	of	the	wrathful	deities
will	arise	in	the	form	of	Yama	Dharmarāja;	and	then	all	of	your	perceptions	will
turn	into	malevolent	forces.	In	this	way,	you	will	continue	to	wander	in	cyclic
existence.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	not	recognise	the	present	appearances
as	natural	manifestations	[of	actual	reality],	even	
though	you	may	have	been
learned	in	all	the	sūtras	and	tantras,	which	form	the	[Buddha’s]	transmitted
precepts,	and	even	though	you	may	have	practised	these	doctrines	for	an	aeon,
buddhahood	 will	 not	 be	 attained.	 Yet,	 if	 you	 recognise	 now	 the	 visionary
appearances	that	are	manifesting	naturally,	then,	through	[the	understanding	of]

a	single	essential	point,	and	through	[the	understanding	of]	a	single	word,	you
will	attain	buddhahood.
If,	immediately	after	death,	you	do	not	recognise	the	appearances	which
manifest	 naturally,	 these	 appearances	 will	 [eventually]	 arise	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	reality,	in	the	forms	of	Yama	Dharmarāja.	The	largest	form
assumed	by	Yama	Dharmarāja	is	as	vast	as	space;	the	medium	form,	the	size	of
Mount	Sumeru,	filling	this	world-system.	[Thus,	Yama	Dharmarāja	will	appear],
his	upper	teeth	biting	into	his	lower	lip,	his	eyes	glassy,	his	hair	tied	up	on	the
crown	of	his	head,	his	belly	bulging	and	his	neck	thin,	brandishing	in	his	hand
the	wooden	slate	[documenting]	past	actions	-	his	mouth	echoing	with	the	cries
of	‘strike!’,	and	‘kill!’	-	he	is	drinking	brains,	severing	heads	and	ripping	out
internal	organs.	In	this	way,	[it	will	appear	as	if	his	form]	fills	the	entire	world.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	when	such	visions	arise,	do	not	be	afraid	or
terrified.	Your	body	is	a	mental	body,	formed	of	habitual	tendencies.	Therefore,
even	if	you	are	slain	and	cut	into	pieces,	you	will	not	die.	You	are,	[in	reality],	a
natural	form	of	emptiness,	so	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.	The	forms	of	Yama
Dharmarāja	 arise,	 too,	 from	 the	 natural	 luminosity	 of	 your	 own	 intrinsic
awareness.	They	have	no	material	substance.	Emptiness	cannot	be	harmed	by
emptiness.	[Clearly]	determine	now	that,	other	than	arising	from	the	natural
expressive	power	of	your	own	awareness,	[whatever	seems	to	appear	to	you]
externally	-	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	the	blood-drinking	[Herukas],	the
diverse	animal-headed	deities,	the	rainbow	lights,	the	frightening	forms	of	Yama,
etc.
	 -	 these	 are	 all	 without	 substantial	 existence.	 If	 this	 is	 successfully
determined,	all	fear	and	terror	will	be	liberated	[naturally],	just	where	it	is.	You
will	dissolve	inseparably	[with	the	visionary	appearances]	and	buddhahood	will
be	attained.
Upon	 recognising	 [the	 visionary	 appearances]	 in	 this	 way,	 be	 fervently
devoted,	and	think:	‘These	are	my	meditational	deities.	They	have	come	to	escort
me	on	the	dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate	state.	I	take	refuge	in	them.’
Remember	 the	 Three	
Precious	 Jewels!	 Remember	 your	 meditational	 deity,
whichever	it	may	be!	Call	to	your	meditational	deity	by	name	and	pray	with	the
following	words:	‘I	am	roaming	in	the	intermediate	state	-	come	quickly	to
rescue	me!	Hold	me	in	your	compassion,	O	precious	meditational	deity!’	Call	to
your	s