,	and	the	fruition	(the
buddha-bodies).	In	order	to	highlight	the	potential	for	liberation	which	exists	in
the	skilful	transformation	of	the	ordinary	states	of	existence,	the	great	Indian
Buddhist	master	Nāgārjuna	uses	the	term	‘
kāya
’	even	when	describing	the	three
ordinary	states.	Thus,	the	dimension	(
kāya
)	of	the	moment	of	death	is	equated
with	the	basic	
dharmakāya
,	the	dimension	(
kāya
)	of	the	intermediate	state	with
the	basic	
sambhogakāya
	and	the	dimension	(
kāya
)	of	the	rebirth	process	with	the
basic	
nirmāṇakāya
	
.
c
	Thus,	it	is	said,	that	through	the	meditative	ability	of	an
accomplished	yogin,	a	genuine	assimilation	takes	place	at	the	actual	moment	of
death,	upon	entering	the	intermediate	state	and	upon	beginning	the	process	of
rebirth.
With	respect	to	training	in	these	practices,	a	similitude	of	such	an	assimilation
can	be	effected	during	the	waking	state,	through	generation	stage	practices,	and

during	sleep,	through	dream	yoga	practices.
In	tantra	the	practice	of	imaginatively	generating	the	meditational	deity,	that	is
to	say,	the	practice	of	tantra’s	generation	stage,	is	a	unique	path	by	which	the
three	fruitional	dimensions	or	buddha-bodies	are	brought	into	the	path	of	one’s
practice.	It	is	through	understanding	the	profundity	of	this	method	that	the	tantric
approach	can	be	fully	appreciated.	The	process	of	generating	oneself	as	the
meditational	deity	is	the	means	by	which	the	indivisible	union	of	the	realisation
of	emptiness	and	the	realisation	of	perfect	awareness	is	brought	to	fruition.	This
accomplishment	directly	counteracts	the	ordinary	perceptions	and	apprehensions
which	underlie	our	ordinary	dualistic	experience.	It	is	this	accomplishment	that
culminates	in	the	realisation	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind,	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	the	state	beyond	ordinary	thought,	where	there	is	no	longer	any	trace	of
the	misapprehension	of	the	nature	of	reality,	of	attachment	or	of	aversion	-	only
pure	radiant	awareness.
The	practice	of	generating	oneself	as	the	meditational	deity	is	found	in	all	four
classes	of	tantra.	However,	these	methods	are	taught	in	their	most	sophisticated
forms	in	the	class	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra.	Depending	on	the	spiritual	capacities
of	 the	 practitioner	 the	 tantras	 describe	 a	 graduated	 series	 of	 methods	 for
generating	oneself	as	the	meditational	deity.	In	the	New	Translation	schools
there	 is	 a	 systematisation	 according	 to	 four	 levels	 of	 capacity	 and	 in	 the
Nyingma	(or	Old	Translation)	school	the	highest	level	of	practice	is	further
subdivided	into	three	methods:	Mahāyoga,	Anuyoga	and	Atiyoga.
In	the	primary	stages	of	tantric	practice,	in	order	to	train	oneself	in	the
actualisation	of	the	three	buddha-bodies,	as	I	have	mentioned,	the	yogin	first
engages	in	the	practices	of	the	generation	stage	of	meditation.	The	generation
stage	 is	 like	 an	 imaginary	 rehearsal	 of	 the	 actual	 processes.	 Then,	 in	 the
perfection	stage	of	meditation,	however,	the	experiences	of	entering	the	Buddha-
body	of	Reality	and	actualising	its	emanational	states,	the	Buddha-body	of
Perfect	Resource	and	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation,	are	not	imagined	but	real,
and	even	involve	certain	physiological	changes	occurring	in	the	yogin’s	body.
Crucial	to	all	these	practices	is	the	process	of	the	dissolution	of	the	gross
consciousnesses	and	energies	of	the	practitioner.	Here,	the	practice	of	Highest
Yoga	Tantra	underlines	the	importance	of	interrupting	or	cutting	off	the	gross
energy	 which	 serves	 as	 a	 vehicle	 for	 conceptual	 elaborations.	
Thereby,
hypothetically	speaking,	if	the	individual	succeeds	in	interrupting	the	flow	of
karmic	energy,	then,	even	if	the	propensities	for	fundamental	ignorance	remain,
they	will	be	rendered	impotent.

As	I	have	noted	above,	if	we	observe	carefully,	we	can	see	a	basic	pattern	of
emergence	and	dissolution	which	is	common	to	both	animate	and	inanimate
phenomena.	Among	inanimate	phenomena	the	processes	of	arising	start	from	the
very	subtle	and	develop