those	of	his	immediate	successors	are	taken	from
Gyarawa	 Namka	 Chokyi	 Gyeltsen’s	 fifteenth-century	
Jewel	 Garland:	 An
Abridged	 History
	
of	 the	 Lineage	 (pp.	 40ff.).	 Of	 particular	 interest	 is	 the
discovery	of	two	distinct	cycles	of	treasure-teachings,	the	well-known	
Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
	
,	and	the
Great	Compassionate	One:	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
.	The	latter	is	no
longer	extant	in	this	form,	although	it	appears	to	have	been	the	source	for	the
masked	drama	contained	in	Chapter	13	of	the	present	work.

Karma	Lingpa
[Revered	as	an	emanation	of	the	great	translator	Chokrolui	Gyeltsen],
Karma	Lingpa	was	born	at	Khyerdrup,	above	Dakpo	in	Southern	Tibet.
He	was	the	eldest	son	of	the	accomplished	master	Nyinda	Sangye,	an
upholder	of	the	mantra	tradition	and	a	treasure-finder	in	his	own	right.
In	 his	 fifteenth	 year,	 the	 prophetic	 declaration	 and	 the	 auspicious
coincidence	came	together.	From	Mount	Gampodar,	which	resembles	a
dancing	god,	he	extracted	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural
Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
,	along	with	the	
Great	Compassionate
One:	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	and	other	treasures.
Unfortunately	others	spoke	ill	of	him	because	he	did	not	form	an
auspicious	 relationship	 with	 the	 intended	 consort	 who	 had	 been
prophesised	for	him	in	connection	with	his	discovery	of	these	treasure-
teachings.	He	did	have	one	son,	but	because	he	showed	a	yellow	scroll
[containing	his	treasures]	to	his	student	before	the	time	when	he	was
destined	to	impart	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation
of	 Enlightened	 Intention
,	 it	 is	 said	 he	 encountered	 life-threatening
obstacles.
Karma	Lingpa	was	endowed	with	innumerable	attributes,	and	dwelt	as
the	very	embodiment	of	unimpeded	enlightened	activity.	So,	knowing	of
his	own	untimely	death,	he	said	with	prescience:	‘In	the	near	future,
many	marks	in	the	form	of	lotus	flowers	will	appear	on	my	body!’,	and
he	also	made	numerous	other	clairvoyant	statements.	Then,	the	next	year,
when	he	was	on	the	point	of	death,	he	granted	the	empowerments	and
transmissions	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation
of	Enlightened	Intention
,	to	his	son	alone,	and	not	to	any	others,	saying
‘You	should	entrust	this	teaching	to	a	saintly	person	who	maintains	the
commitments	and	has	the	name	Nyinda.	His	actions	for	the	welfare	of
living	beings	will	be	most	extensive!’	Making	many	such	prophecies,
Karma	Lingpa	passed	away.
Thus	the	first	lineage	holder	was	Karma	Lingpa’s	own	son,	Nyinda	Choje,	the
author	of	Chapter	1	of	the	present	work.	The	second-generation	lineage	holder,
Lama	Nyinda	Ozer	of	Tsikar	Monastery	in	Longpo,	was	born	in	1409	(earth
female	ox	year),	and	he	is	said	to	have	written	down	the	text	contained	in
Chapter	1	of	the	present	work.	It	is	the	third-generation	lineage	holder	Gyarawa
Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso	who	has	the	distinction	of	being	the	first	person	to

publicly	teach	the	treasures	of	Karma	Lingpa.	The	transmissions	of	the	
Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities
	and	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate
States
	that	eventually	came	to	permeate	the	entire	Tibetan	plateau	can	all	trace
their	roots	back	to	his	teaching	activity,	particularly	at	Menmo	and	Thangdrok
monasteries	in	Kongpo.
The	extensive	dispersion	of	the	lineage	throughout	Tibet	and	the	Himalayan
region	that	issued	from	Gyarawa	has	been	recently	documented,	along	with
visual	charts,	by	Bryan	J.	Cuevas	in	his	work	
The	Hidden	History	of	the	Tibetan
Book	of	the	Dead
.	We	will	not	therefore	describe	this	again	here.	However,	one
important	figure,	from	the	perspective	of	the	literary	history,	is	Rigdzin	Nyima
Drakpa	(1647-1710),	who	in	his	later	years,	at	Takmogang	and	Chakru,	began
transcribing	and	collating	the	various	texts	associated	with	Karma	Lingpa’s
cycle.	It	is	clear	from	the	various	extant	lineage	prayers	that	he	was	directly
responsible	for	standardising	the	shorte