n	obstacle	blocking	the	path	to	liberation!
Do	not	be	attached	to	it!	Abandon	your	attachment!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be
devoted	to	the	red	light,	which	is	radiant	and	dazzling,	and	focus	intently	and
single-mindedly	on	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha	and	his	consort,	and	recite
the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	desire,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha	and	his	consort,
and	you	will	attain	buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the
western	Buddha	field	of	the	Blissful
	(
Sukhāvat
ῑ
).
	
Although	it	is	impossible	not	to	be	liberated	by	[the	successful	recognition	of]
this	[introduction],	there	are	nonetheless	those	who	will	be	unable	to	give	up
their	 propensities	 due	 to	 habituation	 over	
long	 periods	 of	 time,	 even	 after
receiving	 such	 an	 introduction.	 Under	 the	 sway	 of	 envy	 and	 negative	 past
actions,	they	will	become	fearful	and	overawed	by	the	sounds	and	luminosities.
Failing	to	be	caught	by	the	light-ray	hook	of	compassion,	they	roam	downwards
into	 the	 fifth	 day.	 So	 it	 is	 that,	 on	 the	 fifth	 day,	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Amoghasiddhi’s	 assembly	 of	 deities,	 resplendent	 with	 the	 light	 rays	 of

compassion,	will	come	to	escort	them	and,	at	the	same	time,	the	light	path
indicative	of	[the	realm	of]	the	antigods,	which	is	generated	by	the	dissonant
mental	state	of	envy,	will	emerge	invitingly.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	now	be	given
with	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	fifth	day,	the	purity
of	the	entire	wind	element	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	green	light.	At	that	time,
from	the	green	northern	Buddha	field	[called]	Matrix	of	Enlightened	Activities
(
Karmaprasiddhi
)
,	the	transcendent	lord	Buddha	Amoghasiddhi	with	his	retinue
will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	green	in	colour,	holding	in	his	[right]	hand	a
crossed-vajra,	 seated	 on	 a	 c
ῑ
vaṃc
ῑ
vaka	 bird	 throne	 and	 embraced	 by	 the
supreme	consort	Samayatārā.	These	two	are	encircled	by	two	male	bodhisattvas,
Vajrapāṇi	and	Nivāraṇaviṣkhambhin,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,	Gandhā	and
Nart
ῑ.
	Thus,	six	buddha-bodies	will	be	shining	[before	you]	from	within	a	space
of	rainbow	light.
A	green	light	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment,	which
is	the	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies,	green	and
dazzling,	radiant	and	clear,	bright	and	awesome,	adorned	by	greater	and	lesser
seminal	points,	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Amoghasiddhi	and	his	consort
and	it	will	shine	piercingly	before	you	at	the	level	of	your	heart,	[with	such
brilliance]	that	your	eyes	cannot	bear	it.	Do	not	be	afraid!	This	is	the	natural
expressive	power	of	your	own	awareness!	Rest	in	a	state	of	great	equanimity,
transcending	activity,	free	from	[the	dichotomies	of]	attachment	and	aversion,
based	on	[your	feelings	of]	nearness	and	distance.	Together	with	the	light	of
pristine	cognition,	a	dull	red	light,	[indicative	of	the	realm]	of	the	antigods	and
formed	by	envy,	will	also	dawn	before	you	[and	touch	your	heart].	Cultivate	an
equanimity	toward	this	[dull	light]	which	is	free	from	attachment	or	aversion!
Even	if	your	mental	capacity	is	diminished,	
at	least	do	not	delight	in	it.	At	this
time,	under	the	sway	of	deep	envy,	you	will	[wish	to]	turn	away	in	terror	from
the	bright	and	dazzling	green	luminosity	and	you	will	come	to	feel	delight	and
attachment	towards	the	dull	red	light	of	the	antigods.	At	this	moment,	aban