n
That	abides	within	the	immeasurable	palace	of	the	pure	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	which	is	mind’s	actual	nature,
23
Free	from	an	objective	referent,	empty,	radiant,	and	free	from	subjective
apprehension.
Please	accept	[these	offerings],	with	compassion	and	love!
May	all	beings	be	born	into	the	field	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
By	offering	this	exquisite	and	pleasing	maṇḍala,
May	no	obstacles	arise	on	the	path	to	enlightenment!
May	the	enlightened	intention	of	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and
future,	be	realised,
May	I	neither	be	bewildered	in	migratory	existence,
Nor	lulled	by	the	solitary	quiescence	[of	nirvāṇa]!
But	may	I	liberate	beings	throughout	the	expanse	of	space!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	MAHĀ	GURU	DEVA	ḌĀKINĪ	RATNA	MAṆḌALA	PŪJĀ
MEGHA	Ā	HŪṂ
24
Prayer	to	the	Lineage	Teachers
(Then,	in	order	to	cultivate	union	with	the	spiritual	teacher,	the	prayer	to	the
lineage	should	be	recited	as	follows:)
	
I	pray	to	the	[direct]	intentional	lineage	of	the	conquerors:
To	Samantabhadra,	primordial	lord,	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
To	the	Conqueror	Vajradhara,	embodiment	of	the	sixth	[enlightened	family],

And	to	Vajrasattva,	foremost	of	guides,	the	supreme	buddha-mind.
	
I	pray	to	the	[symbolic]	lineage	of	the	awareness	holders:
To	the	awareness	holder	Prahevajra,	supreme	among	emanations,
To	the	spiritual	teacher	Sr
ῑ
	Simha,	supreme	son	of	the	conquerors,
To	the	undying	Padmākara,	established	in	the	Buddha-body	of	Indestructible
Reality,
And	to	the	ḍākin
ῑ
	[Yeshe]	Tshogyalma,	worthy	recipient	of	the	secret	mantras.
	
I	pray	to	the	aural	lineage	of	[authoritative]	personages:
To	Karma	Lingpa,	master	of	the	profound	treasures,
To	the	one	named	[Nyinda]	Choje,	supreme	son	of	his	buddha-mind,
And	to	the	one	named	Sūryacandra	[Nyinda	Ozer],	lord	of	living	beings
during	this	degenerate	age.
	
I	pray	to	the	assembled	deities	of	the	three	roots:
To	all	the	genuine	spiritual	teachers	of	the	core	lineage,
Who	form	the	connecting	links	[of	this	transmission],
25
To	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	meditational	deities,	in	whom	appearance	and
emptiness	are	indivisible,
And	to	the	oceanic	assembly	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s	and	oath-bound	protectors	of	the
[sacred]	teachings!
	
O	you	spiritual	teachers	who	uphold	the	lineage	of	the	oral	transmission,
26
And	train	each	according	to	his	or	her	needs!
If	your	teaching	were	to	enter	into	decline,
The	yogins	of	this	era	would	be	[utterly]	disheartened.
Please,	therefore,	continue	to	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic
existence!
	
As	we	call	out	to	you	with	mournful	and	tormented	cries,
Bring	to	mind,	now,	the	strict	vows	which	you	made	in	the	past!
27
Reveal	your	faces	from	the	expanse	of	space,	endowed	with	major	and	minor
marks!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!

Let	your	Brahmā	voice	reverberate	like	a	thousand	peals	of	thunder!
28
Open	[wide]	the	portals	to	the	treasury	of	your	buddha-mind!
Pour	out	the	light	rays	of	your	discriminative	awareness	and	compassion!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Liberate	now,	without	exception,	all	beings	of	this	final	era!
29
Anoint	[us]	now	with	the	river	of	the	four	pure	empowerments!
Liberate	now	the	four	continua,	bewildered	by	dissonant	mental	states!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Grant	now	the	fruitional	attainment	of	the	four	buddha-bodies	of	Those	Gone
to	Bliss!
May	I	become	a	spiritual	teacher,	[able]	to	guide	all	the	infinite	sentient
beings,
Who	have	been	my	parents,	throughout	space,	without	exception!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Receiving	the	Four	Empowerments
(Then	the	meditation	to	be	adopted	while	receiving	the	four	empowerments
should	be	as	follows:
30
)
	
From	the	crown	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,
A	white	syllable	OṂ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	mid-point	between	my	eyebrows,
The	vase	empowerment	is	thus	received	and	the	obscurations	of	the	body	are
purified.
Please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishmen