radiance	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	they	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality.	If	they	achieve	recognition	during	this	intermediate	state	of	reality,	when
the	visions	 of	 the	Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	Deities	 arise,	they	will	 attain	 the
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource.	 If	 they	 achieve	 recognition	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth,	they	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation.
Alternatively,	at	the	very	least,	[individuals	who	have	heard	this	teaching]	will
be	born	into	the	higher	existences,	where,	based	on	the	residual	potency	of	their

past	actions,	they	will	again	meet	with,	and	be	able	to	practise,	this	[sacred]
teaching	in	the	next	life.
Since	[this	sacred	teaching	is	based	on	recognition	in	the	intermediate	states]
this	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
	is	the	teaching	whereby	buddhahood	can	be
attained	without	meditation.	It	is	the	teaching	whereby	liberation	can	be	attained
just	by	its	being	heard,	it	is	the	teaching	whereby	those	that	are	the	most	negative
are	led	onto	the	secret	path,
4
	it	is	the	teaching	whereby	essential	points	[of
discrimination]	are	instantly	grasped,	and	it	is	the	profound	teaching	whereby
perfect	buddhahood	is	instantaneously	attained.	Thus,	it	is	impossible	for	those
sentient	beings	who	have	been	engaged	by	this	teaching	to	fall	into	lower
existences.	This	[
Liberation	by	Hearing
]	and	the	[related]	
Liberation	by	Wearing
should	be	read	aloud	together,	since	[their	conjunction]	is	like	a	maṇḍala	of	gold,
inlaid	with	turquoise	ornaments.
5
MAIN	SUBJECT	MATTER
Having	outlined	in	this	way	the	essential	purpose	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
,
[the	deceased]	should	now	be	introduced	to	the	arising	of	the	intermediate	state
of	the	wrathful	deities.
Again,	 you	 should	 call	 the	 deceased	 by	 name,	 three	 times,	 and	 say	 the
following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	Although	the	intermediate
state	 of	 the	 peaceful	 deities	 did	 previously	 arise	 within	 you,	 you	 did	 not
recognise	it.	So	now	you	have	wandered,	[through	the	succession	of	pathways,]
to	here.	Now,	on	the	eighth	
day,	the	assembly	of	wrathful	blood-drinking	deities
will	arise.	Recognise	them	and	do	not	be	distracted!	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
he	 who	 is	 called	 Great	 Glorious	 Buddha	 Heruka	 will	 [now]	 arise,	 vividly
manifesting	before	you	from	within	your	own	brain.	His	body,	blazing	in	a	mass
of	light,	is	dark	brown	in	colour,	having	three	heads,	six	arms	and	four	legs,
which	are	[firmly]	set	apart.	His	right	face	is	white,	the	left	red	and	the	central
face	dark	brown.	His	nine	eyes	are	fixed	in	a	fearsome	wrathful	gaze,	his
eyebrows	are	quivering	like	lightning,	his	fangs	are	bared	and	gleaming,	and	he
is	laughing	loudly,	uttering	the	sounds	of	Alala	and	Haha,	and	Shoo	oo	-	like
whistles,	in	loud	piercing	cries.	The	golden-auburn	hair	of	his	head	blazes	and

rears	upward,	sun	and	moon-discs,	black	serpents	and	dry	skulls	adorn	each	of
his	heads,	and	black	snakes	and	fresh	skulls	form	a	garland	around	his	body.	In
his	six	hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	wheel,	in	the	middle	one,
an	axe	and	in	the	last	hand	a	sword	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand,	he	holds	a
bell,	in	the	middle	one,	a	ploughshare	and	in	the	last	a	skull.	The	female	consort
Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around	his
neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.	Amidst	loud
pounding	 palatal	 sounds	 of	 ‘Thuk-chom’,	 and	 an	 [echoing]	 roar	 like	 the
reverberation	of	thunder,	the	fire	of	pristine	cognition	blazes	from	the	fiery
indestructible	pores	of	their	bodies,	and	thus	they	stand	together,	[with	one	leg]
extended	and	[the	other]	drawn	in,	on	a	throne	supported	by	garuḍas.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to
be	 the	 buddha-body	 of	 your	 own	 intrinsic	 awareness.	 These	 are	 your	 own
meditational	deities,	so	do	not	be	terrified.	This,	in	reality,