vividly	displayed.	[The	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta]	is	led	along	the	path	[of	virtue]
represented	by	the	white	carpet,	clad	in	fine	robes,	and	wearing	fine	ornaments.
)
DHARMARĀJA	(
offering	praise
):	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	this	is	how
one	should	serve	the	purpose	of	obtaining	a	human	body.	Rejoice	[in	this]!
(
Then,	 he	 recites	 the	 following	 aspirational	 prayer	 of	 Avalokiteśvara	 three
times.
)
	
OṂ	MAṆI	PADME	HŪṂ	HRĪḤ!
31
May	all	sentient	beings,	including	you	Śr
ῑ
jāta,
Be	guided	on	the	path	by	the	essence	of	the	Six-syllable	Mantra!
May	cyclic	existence	with	its	three	world-systems	be	churned	to	its	depths,
And	may	the	hells	be	exhausted	and	emptied!
(
He	urges	[all	to	recite]	that	Six-syllable	Mantra.
)
	
THE	SPIRITUAL	TEACHER:	O,	Children	of	Buddha	Nature,	behold	this
distinction	between	the	happiness	and	suffering	experienced	by	the	evil	‘Red-

handed	Butcher’	and	the	faithful	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	in	consequence	of	their
disparate	accumulations	of	virtue	and	negativity!	As	we	ourselves	shall	also
encounter	such	experiences	soon,	it	is	most	important	that	we	strive	after	virtue
and	refrain	from	negativity!	(
Then,	[the	spiritual	teacher]	should	confer	the
empowerment	 [of	 the	 Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities],	 recite	 the	 auspicious
verses,	and	perform	the	aspirational	prayer	for	the	dedication	of	merit,	followed
by	the	concluding	rite.
)
COLOPHON
How	wonderful!	I,	Padmākara,	having	actually	seen	the	hells,	composed	this
[masked	drama]	as	an	adjunct	to	the	teaching	of	the	
[Great]	Liberation	by
Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	in	order	to	benefit	sentient	beings	of	the
future.	May	it	be	encountered	by	those	who	are	fortunate!
This	concludes	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth:	A
Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural	Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity.
32
	May	all
be	auspicious!
33

PART	TWO
Supplement	to	the	Masked	Drama	of	Rebirth
Herein	 is	 contained	 the	
Supplement	 to	 the	 Teaching	 Revealing	 the	 Natural
Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity	in	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth,	entitled
Gong	of	Divine	Melody;
1
	which	is	an	extract	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra	and	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities!
THE	SCENE
(
In	the	context	of	[the	masked	drama	entitled]
	A	Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural
Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity	which	is	[associated	with	the]	Introduction
to	 the	 Intermediate	 State	 of	 Rebirth
,	 the	 one	 called	 ‘the	 wrongdoing
Lakṣanāraka’	(‘hundred	thousand	hells’)	is	shown	entering	the	inferior	realms.
Amidst	the	thunderous	cries	of	‘Strike!’	and	‘Kill!’	uttered	by	the	executors	of
Yama’s	rites,	he	travels	the	black	path,	after	which	Dharmarāja	teaches	on	the
disadvantages	of	committing	negative	actions	to	the	entire	audience	assembled
there.
3
	
Following	 this,	 the	 deity	 representing	 the	 good	 conscience	 [should
appear]	in	a	state	of	sadness,	and	should	urge	[the	audience	to	recite]	the	Six-
syllable	Mantra.
)
ACT	ONE
THE	DEITY	REPRESENTING	THE	GOOD	CONSCIENCE:	Please	recite
the	 Six-syllable	 Mantra	 once	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 deceased,	 the	 wrongdoing
Lakṣanāraka!	OṂ	MAṆI	PADME	HŪṂ	HRĪḤ!	Please	recite	the	Six-syllable
Mantra	once	on	behalf	of	all	beings	present	within	the	intermediate	state	[of

rebirth]!	(
Then	speaking	to	the	assembled	audience
)	O	listen!	I	am	the	one	called
deity	of	good	conscience.	This	wrongdoing	Lakṣanāraka	has	committed	many
negative	actions,	as	a	result	of	which,	at	this	moment,	in	the	whole	world,	I	can
only	find	six	tiny	white	pebbles	representing	his	virtuous	actions,	but	there	are
innumerable	pebbles	[here]	representing	his	non-virtuous	past	actions.	[Now],	by
the	power	of	his	bad	past	actions,	he	has	been	led	away	to	the	hells	by	the
executors	of	Yama’s	rites.	Although	I	wanted	to	guide	him	to	higher	rebirths,	I
have	been	unable	to	find	a	way	[to	help	him].
All	of	you	w