tekeepers:	Aṅkuśā,	Pāśā,	Sphoṭā	and	Ghaṇṭā,	represent	the
natural	purity	of	the	four	types	of	birth	and	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations

The	Fifty-eight	Wrathful	Deities
The	six	peaceful	male	buddhas:	Samantabhadra,	Vairocana,	Aksobhya-
Vajrasattva,	Rtnasambhava,	Amitabha	and	Amoghasiddhi	are	in	their	wrathful
aspects	respectively:	Mahottara	Heruka,	Buddha	Heruka,	Vajra	Heruka,	Ratna
Heruka,	Padma	Heruka	and	Karma	Heruka,	who	represent	the	natural
transformation	of	the	six	dissonant	mental	states.

The	six	peaceful	female	budhas:	Samantabhadrῑ,	Ᾱkāśadhātvῑśvarῑ,
Buddhalocanā,	Māmakῑ,	Pāndaravāsinῑ	and	Samayatārā	in	their	wrathful	aspects
respectively	are	Krodheśvarῑ,	Buddhakrodheśvarῑ,	Vajrakrodheśvarῑ,
Ratnakrodheśvarῑ,	Padmakrodheśvarῑ	and	Karmakrodheśvarῑ,	who	represent	the
natural	transformation	of	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	six	objects	of
consciousness

The	eight	Mātarah:	Gaurῑ,	Caurῑ,	Pratāmohā,	Vetālῑ,	Ghasmarῑ,	Candālῑ	and
Śmaśānῑ,	represent	the	natural	transformation	of	mental	constructs	associated
with	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness

The	eight	Piśācῑ:	Simhamukhῑ,	Vyāghrῑmukhῑ,	Śṛgālamukhῑ,	Kaṅkamukhῑ,
Kākamukhῑ	and	Ulūkamukhῑ,	represent	the	natural	transformation	of	mental
constructs	associated	with	the	objects	of	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness

The	four	Female	Gatekeepers	manifest	as	Vajratejasῑ,	Vajrāmoghā,	Vajralokā	and
Vajravetālῑ,	respectively	representing	the	closing	of	the	doors	to	the	four	types	of
birth	and	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations

Twenty-eight	Iśvarῑ,	represent	the	purification	of	the	aggregates	of	bewildered
mental	constructs	and	the	enactment	of	enlightened	activity

Notes
List	of	Abbreviations
Derge	 Derge	 Parkhang	 xylographic	 editions,	 of	 the	
Kangyur
,	
Tengyur
	 and
Collected	Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
	(NGB).
Disc.	
gTer-ston
,	discoverer	of	concealed	teachings	(
gter	ma
).
DR	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
,	3	vols.	The	most	extensive	and
accurate	 version	 of	 Karma	 Lingpa’s	 revelations	 (64	 texts,	 764	 folios),	 a
manuscript	 of	 Katok	 provenance,	 from	 the	 library	 of	 the	 previous	 Dudjom
Rinpoche,	 published	 in	 photo-offset	 form	 (Delhi:	 Sherab	 Lama,	 1975-76),
reproduced	on	CD-ROM	by	TBRC,	New	York,	Ref:	2330-2332.
GGFTC	G.	Dorje,	
The	Guhyagarbhatattvaviniścayamahātantra	and	its	XIVth
Century	Tibetan	Commentary	Phyogs	bcu	mun	sel.
	3	vols.	Unpublished	Ph.D.
thesis,	 University	 of	 London,	 1987.	 See	 also	
The	 Guhyagarbha	 Tantra:
Dispelling	the	Darkness	of	the	Ten	Directions
	(forthcoming).
MTTWL	 P.	 Pfandt,	
Mahāyāna	 Texts	 Translated	 into	 Western	 Languages
.
Cologne:	In	Komission	bei	E.	J.	Brill,	1983.
NA	Not	available,	not	extant.
NGB	The	Derge	xylographic	edition	of	the	
Collected	Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
(
rNying-ma’i	rgyud-’bum
)	in	26	vols.
NK	
Collected	Teachings	of	the	Nyingmapa
	(
rNying-ma’i	bka’-ma
),	compiled	in
120	vols.	by	Khenpo	Jamyang,	Katok	(1999).
NSTB	 Dudjom	 Rinpoche,	
The	 Nyingma	 School	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism:	 Its
Fundamentals	and	History
,	translated	by	G.	Dorje	and	M.	Kapstein,	Boston:
Wisdom	Publications,	1991.	This	volume	contains	two	texts,	
Gangs-ljongs	rgya-
bstan	yongs-rdzogs-kyi	phyi-mo	snga-’gyur	rdo-rje	theg-pa’i	bstan-pa	rin-po-
che	 ji-ltar	 byung-ba’i	 tshul-dag-cing	 gsal-bar	 brjod-pa	 lha-dbang	 gYul-las
rgyal-ba’i	 rngabo-che’i	 sgra-dbyangs
	 (short	 title:	
rNying-ma’i	chos-’byung
),
and	the	
gSang-sngags	snga-’gyur	rnying-ma-ba’i	bstan-pa’i	rnam-gzhag	mdo-
tsam	brjod-pa	legs-bshad	snang-ba’i	dga’-ston
	(short	title:	
bsTan-pa’i	rnam-
gzhag
).
Redisc.	Rediscoverer	of	twice-concealed	teachings	(
yang-gter
).
SDGG	Lochen	Dharmaśr
ῑ
,	
gSang-bdag	dgongs-rgyan
,	NK,	Vol.	76.
T	
A	Complete	Catalogue	of	the	Tibetan	Buddhist	Canons
,	ed.	H.	Ui	
et	al
.,

Sendai:	Tohoku	University,	1934.	This	is	a	catalogue	to	the	Derge	xylographic
edition	of	the	
Kangyur
	and	
Tengyur
.
TBD	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	(
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
).
TBD	Amdo	edition	
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
,	303	pages,	recen