minently].
	
In	addition	to	such	signs,	the	following	may	also	occur:
A	turbid	confusion	and	darkening	of	normal	consciousness,
A	loss	of	one’s	former	appetite,
Embarrassment	and	incapacity	in	undertaking	virtuous	acts,
A	[restless]	urge	to	leave,	and	an	inability	to	stay	in	one	place,
Discomfort	in	bed	and	inability	to	fall	asleep,
Recurring	amnesia	and	disorientation,
Recurring	memories	of	one’s	former	kindred,	and	the	desire	to	be	with	them
[again],
Death	wishes	and	the	desire	to	commit	suicide,
The	desire	to	roam	and	travel	alone,	without	companions,
Inertia,	faintheartedness,	and	character	changes,
Poor	physique	and	the	convergence	of	many	different	illnesses,
Dreams	which	are	disturbed	and	recurringly	negative,
The	welling	up	of	powerful	mental	anxiety,
Impious	behaviour,	which	does	not	avoid	the	five	poisonous,	dissonant	mental
states,
Lack	of	clarity	and	loss	of	faith	in	the	[sublime]	instructions,

And	incontinence	or	constant	secretion	of	generative	fluids.
	
Such	are	the	[miscellaneous]	signs	that	death	is	near.
Examine	and	scrutinise	them	with	awareness!
Then,	[if	the	time	of	death	has	arrived],
The	transference	of	consciousness	should	be	performed!
33
SIGNS	OF	EXTREMELY	NEAR	DEATH
Now	follows	the	presentation	of	the	signs	of	extremely	near	death:
The	five	sense	faculties	dissolve	sequentially,
And	as	a	sign	of	this	[imminent]	demise	of	the	sense	faculties,
One	will	be	unable	to	digest	food	and	drink,	and	one	may	vomit.
Bodily	warmth	will	diminish,	the	neck	will	not	support	the	head,
And	one	will	feel	that	the	head	is	sinking	downwards.
	
Then	the	five	elements	will	dissolve	as	follows:
34
The	internal	earth	element	comprises	flesh	and	bone.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	earth	element,
The	body	will	grow	heavy,	and	its	skin	will	sag	towards	the	ground,
Whereupon,	as	an	internal	sign,	one	will	feel	that	the	body	is	sinking	into	the
earth.
Because	the	energy	of	earth	will	have	dissolved	into	water,
One	will	be	incapable	[of	supporting]	one’s	physical	form.
Bodily	strength	will	slip	away,	and	consciousness	will	become	clouded.
35
	
The	internal	water	element	comprises	blood	and	serum.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	water	element,
Saliva	and	nasal	mucus	will	be	secreted,
While	the	throat	and	the	tongue	will	become	dry.
Because	the	energy	of	water	will	have	dissolved	into	fire,
The	warmth	of	the	body	will	slip	away,
And	consciousness	will	oscillate	between	clarity	and	dullness.
36
	

The	internal	fire	element	comprises	warmth.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	fire	element,
The	eyes	will	roll	upwards,	and	one	will	no	longer	recognise	people.
Because	the	energy	of	fire	will	have	dissolved	into	wind,
The	warmth	[of	the	body]	will	converge.
37
	
The	internal	wind	element	comprises	breath.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	wind	element,
The	breath	will	become	wheezy,	and	the	limbs	will	quiver.
As	an	internal	indication,	consciousness	will	become	turbulent,
While	mirage-like	flashing	and	fleeting	[visions]	will	arise,
And	[concurrently]	all	lice	and	nits	will	leave	the	body.
38
	
[Then],	 the	 red	 ‘generative	 essence’	 derived	 from	 one’s	 mother	 will	 rise
upwards,
And	the	phenomenon	called	‘redness’	will	occur,
Wherein	all	appearances	are	suffused	by	redness.
At	that	point,	appearances	will	dissolve	into	the	‘[subtle	mental	consciousness
of]	increasing	[redness]’,
And	the	forty	patterns	of	conceptual	thought	that	originate	from	attachment
will	cease.
39
	
[Then],	the	white	‘generative	essence’	derived	from	one’s	father	will	fall
downward,
And	the	phenomenon	called	‘whiteness’	will	occur,
Wherein	all	appearances	are	suffused	by	whiteness.
At	that	point,	the	‘increasing	[redness]’	will	dissolve	into	the	‘[subtle	mind	of]
attainment’,
And	 the	 thirty-three	 patterns	 of	 conceptual	 thought	 that	 originate	 from
aversion	will	cease.
	
[During	this	process,	each	exhalation	of]	breath	will	become	increasingly
protracted,
While	all	the	b