logy	known	as	the	
Store	of
Precious	Treasures
	(
Rinchen	gter-mdzod
),	which	was	recently	republished	in	76
volumes.	Just	as	the	anthology	of	the	‘long	lineage’	contains	many	commentaries
on	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
,	a	significant	number	of	‘treasure-teachings’	are	also

inspired	by	its	portrayal	of	the	hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	Among
them	the	most	elaborate	is	the	cycle	discovered	in	the	fourteenth	century	by
Karma	 Lingpa	 —	 the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 A	 Profound	 Sacred
Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened
Intention
	(
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
).	The	compendium	of	texts
now	known	outside	Tibet	as	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	is	an	abridgement	of
this	treasury	of	texts	discovered	by	Karma	Lingpa.
THE	CONCEALMENT	BY	PADMASAMBHAVA
The	extant	cycle	of	texts	that	comprise	Karma	Lingpa’s	revelations	includes	a
few	short	biographies	and	historical	accounts	of	the	work’s	original	concealment
and	subsequent	revelation,	which	were	composed	by	later	lineage	holders.	The
following	passage	from	the	
Middle-length	Empowerment
	(pp.	61-4)	describes
the	roots	of	this	tradition:
At	the	time	when	[Padmasambhava]	was	turning	incalculable	wheels	of	the
teachings	concerning	the	supremely	secret	vehicle	[of	Vajrayāna],	he	revealed,	in
accord	with	the	individual	capacities	of	the	fortunate	king	[Trisong	Detsen]	and
his	subjects,	many	practices	related	to	the	generation	and	perfection	stages	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities;	and	these	were	[later]	concealed,	for	the	most
part,	as	profound	treasures,	for	the	benefit	of	beings	in	the	future.
When	Padmasambhava	was	nearing	the	completion	of	his	direct	
spiritual	work
and	teaching	in	Tibet,	the	sovereign	and	his	son	[Prince	Mutri	Tsenpo],	along
with	the	translator	Chokrolui	Gyelsten	and	others,	offered	him	a	maṇḍala	of	gold
and	turquoise,	and	fervently	made	the	following	supplication:	‘Although	your
compassion	is	always	present	and	in	the	past	you	have	held	high	the	incalculable
beacons	of	the	teaching,	according	to	the	outer	and	inner	vehicles,	yet	for	the
benefit	of	ourselves,	the	king,	ministers,	friends	and	subjects,	and	for	future
beings	of	the	degenerate	age,	we	request	you	to	give	a	teaching	which	is	the
quintessence	of	all	the	teachings	of	the	outer	and	inner	vehicles;	one	through
which	buddhahood	may	be	attained	in	a	single	lifetime;	one	which	will	bestow
liberation	by	merely	hearing	it,	a	profound	and	concise	teaching	containing	the
essential	meaning.’
Thus,	 [in	 response	 to	 their	 supplication]	 the	 Great	 Master	 replied,	 ‘O!
Sovereign	 King,	 Prince,	 Ministers,	 in	 accord	 with	 your	 wish,	 I	 do	 have	 a
teaching	which	is	the	essential	point	of	all	the	six	million	four	hundred	thousand

tantras	of	the	Great	Perfection,	which	were	brought	forth	from	the	enlightened
intention	of	glorious	Samantabhadra.	By	merely	hearing	this	teaching,	the	doors
leading	to	birth	in	inferior	existences	will	be	blocked.	By	merely	understanding
it	you	will	arrive	at	the	level	of	supreme	bliss.	Those	who	take	its	meaning	to
heart	 will	 reach	 the	 irreversible	 level	 of	 the	 spontaneously	 accomplished
awareness-holders.	It	can	bring	great	benefit	for	all	those	who	are	connected
with	it.
‘Although	I	do	possess	such	a	teaching,	since	those	who	are	of	weak	mind,	or
who	are	naturally	inclined	towards	the	Lesser	Vehicle,	or	who	lack	good	fortune,
and	harbour	wrong	views	and	doubts,	may	disparage	this	teaching	and	thereby
fall	into	inferior	existences,	you	should	not	proclaim	[this	teaching]	to	others,
even	[by	whispering	its	name]	into	the	wind.	It	should	be	concealed	as	a	[buried]
treasure	for	the	sake	of	future	beings	of	the	degenerate	age.’
So	it	was	that	he	named	this	teaching,	which	essentialises	all	teachings,	the
Peace	ful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
,	and	he	bestowed	it
on	the	translator,	[Chokro]lui	Gyeltsen,	as