We	who	are	fearless	and	hard-hearted,	despite	having	seen	so	many	sufferings
of	birth,	old	age,	sickness	and	death,
Are	wasting	our	human	lives,	endowed	with	freedom	and	opportunity,
6
	on	the
paths	of	distraction.

Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	we	may	[continuously]	remember	impermanence
and	death!
	
Since	we	do	not	recognise	that	impermanent	[things]	are	unreliable,
Still,	even	now,	we	remain	attached,	clinging	to	this	cycle	of	existence.
Wishing	for	happiness,	we	pass	our	human	lives	in	suffering.
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	attachment	to	cyclic	existence	may	be	reversed!
	
Our	impermanent	environment	will	be	destroyed	by	fire	and	water,
7
The	impermanent	sentient	beings	within	it	will	endure	the	severing	of	body
and	mind.
The	seasons	of	the	year:	summer,	winter,	autumn	and	spring,	themselves
[exemplify]	impermanence.
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	disillusionment	[with	conditioned	existence]	may
arise	from	the	depths	[of	our	hearts]!
	
Last	year,	this	year,	the	waxing	and	waning	moons,
The	days,	nights,	and	indivisible	time	moments	are	all	impermanent.
If	we	reflect	carefully,	we	too	are	face	to	face	with	death.
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	we	may	become	resolute	in	our	practice!
	
Though	this	[body]	endowed	with	freedom	and	opportunity	is	extremely	hard
to	find,
When	the	Lord	of	Death
8
	approaches	in	the	semblance	of	disease,
How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	who,	bereft	of	the	[sacred]	teachings,
Return	empty-handed	[from	this	life]!
Grant	your	blessing	so	that	[a	recognition	of]	urgency	may	grow	in	our	minds!
	
Alas!	Alas!	O	Precious	Jewel,	embodiment	of	compassion!
Since	you,	the	Conqueror,	are	endowed	with	a	loving	heart,
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	we	and	the	six	classes	of	beings
May	be	liberated,	right	now,	from	the	sufferings	of	cyclic	existence!
UNCOMMON	PRELIMINARY	PRACTICE

Refuge
(Then,	the	outer,	inner,	and	secret	refuges	should	be	adopted	in	the	following
way:)
	
Outer	Refuge
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	spiritual	teachers
Whose	enlightened	intention,	throughout	the	past,	present	and	future,
Is	uninterruptedly	directed	towards	living	beings,
The	infinite	sentient	beings	of	the	three	world	systems	and	six	classes.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	[perfect]	buddhas,
The	Transcendent	Ones	Gone	to	Bliss	of	the	ten	directions	and	four	times,
Foremost	of	humankind,	adorned	by	the	major	and	minor	marks,
Whose	enlightened	activities	are	inexhaustible,	and	as	vast	as	space.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	sacred	teachings,
Including	the	doctrines	of	the	ultimate	truth,	quiescent	and	desireless,
The	irreversible	path
9
	of	the	three	vehicles,
And	the	transmissions,	esoteric	instructions,	and	treatises
Of	the	transmitted	precepts	and	treasures.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	communities	[of	monks	and	nuns],
Who	abide	on	the	unerring	path,	forming	a	field	of	all	supreme	merits,
10
Together	with	the	assembly	of	Sublime	Ones,	set	apart	from	the	stains	of
dissonant	mental	states,
And	the	supreme	upholders	of	the	Teaching:	bodhisattvas,	pious	attendants,
and	hermit	buddhas.
	
Inner	Refuge
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	spiritual	teachers,
[Embodying]	the	essential	nature	of	the	buddhas	of	the	three	times,
The	masters	of	all	the	secret	and	unsurpassed	maṇḍalas,

Who	guide	all	living	beings	with	their	blessings	and	compassion.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	meditational	deities,
Who,	even	though	[they	remain	unmoving	as]	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
Uncreated	and	free	from	the	limits	of	conceptual	elaboration,
Emanate	in	peaceful	and	wrathful	forms	for	the	sake	of	living	beings,
And	confer	the	supreme	and	common	accomplishments.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	assembly	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
Who,	moving	with	the	energy	of	compassion	through	the	space	of	reality,
Grant	supreme	bliss	[as	they	arise]	from	their	pure	abodes,
And	bestow	accomplishments	upon	those	who	keep	their	commitments.
	
Secret	Refuge
	
From	within	a	state	free	from	grasping	and	beyond	intellect,
I	take	refuge