entient	 beings,	 including
himself.	At	this	point,	the	lama	should	visualise	in	the	space	in	front	of
himself	 images	 of	 the	 three	 objects	 of	 refuge	 -	 the	 Buddha,	 sacred
teachings	and	ideal	community	-	forming	a	tree,	whose	branches	like
billowing	clouds	in	the	sky	are	adorned	by	buddhas,	bodhisattvas	and	the
spiritual	masters	of	the	lineage.	Then	he	should	visualise	that	the	dying
person,	surrounded	by	all	sentient	beings,	takes	refuge	by	reciting	the
following	verses	three	times:
	
I	take	refuge	from	now	until	enlightenment,

In	the	Buddha,	the	[sacred]	teachings	and	the	supreme	assembly.
Through	the	merit	of	practising	generosity	and	the	other	[perfections],
May	I	attain	buddhahood	for	the	sake	of	[all]	living	beings.
	
Maintaining	this	same	visualisation,	the	lama	should	slowly	recite	with	full
concentration	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations,	based	on	the	cultivation	of
loving	kindness,	compassion,	sympathetic	joy,	and	equanimity.
	
May	all	sentient	beings	be	endowed	with	happiness!
May	they	all	be	separated	from	suffering	and	its	causes!
May	they	be	endowed	with	joy,	free	from	suffering!
May	they	abide	in	equanimity,	free	from	attraction	and	aversion!
	
Up	to	this	point,	the	preliminary	procedures	are	common	to	all	the	traditions	of
Tibetan	Buddhism.	Next,	the	lama	should	enter	into	the	practice	of	the	
Natural
Liberation	 of	 Habitual	 Tendencies
,	 as	 presented	 in	 Chapter	 5.	 During	 the
practice	of	the	initial	ten-branched	prayer	(contained	in	Chapter	5),	the	refuge
tree	 is	 still	 visualised	 in	 the	 space	 in	 front.	 As	 the	 ten-branched	 prayer	 is
concluded	the	lama	visualises	that	all	the	objects	of	refuge	melt	into	light	and
then	 gradually	 dissolve	 into	 the	 crowns	 of	 each	 of	 the	 attending	 persons,
including	the	dying	person	and	himself.	So	at	this	point	the	body,	speech	and
mind	of	all	enlightened	beings,	the	objects	of	refuge,	become	indivisible	from
the	lama’s	own	body,	speech,	and	mind	and	those	of	all	others	present.	Like
water	poured	into	water	they	become	inseparably	one	in	nature.	In	this	way,	it	is
visualised	that	all	those	present	are	brought	under	the	protection	of	the	Three
Precious	Jewels.
Then,	like	a	bubble	emerging	from	water,	the	lama	visualises	himself	arising
out	of	emptiness	in	the	form	of	Vajrasattva	and	he	continues	with	the	practice	of
the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
.	Once	this	practice	is	complete,
extensive	 mental	 offerings	 should	 then	 be	 made	 to	 all	 the	 buddhas	 and
bodhisattvas	and	the	lama	should	slowly	recite	three	or	seven	times	the	short
prayer	 entitled	 an	
Aspirational	 Prayer	 [Calling]	 to	 the	 Buddhas	 and
Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
	(see	Chapter	12),	followed	by	the	accompanying
aspirational	 prayers.	 This	 is	 often	 followed	 by	 a	 series	 of	 more	 general
recitations	from	the	Buddhist	canon,	including	the	
Sūtra	of	the	Three	
Heaps
(
Triskandhakasūtra
,	T	284),	dedicated	to	the	Thirty-five	Buddhas	of	Confession,

the	recitation	of	the	names	of	the	thousand	buddhas	of	this	aeon,	following	the
arrangement	of	Sākyaśrī	of	Kashmir,	entitled	
Ornate	Garland	of	the	Auspicious
Aeon
	(
Bhadrakalpikālaṃkāramālā
	
,	T	1169),	together	with	the	recitation	of	the
mantras	 given	 in	 the	
Tantra	 of	 the	 Purification	 of	 All	 Lower	 Destinies
(
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra
	
,	T	483).	Just	to	hear	these	names	is	said	to
make	a	powerful	impact	on	the	consciousness	of	the	dying	person.
At	this	point,	the	lama	has	to	be	very	observant	of	the	dying	person.	Excessive
preoccupation	with	the	completion	of	these	recitations	may	distract	him	from
seizing	the	moment	when	the	dying	person’s	consciousness	actually	leaves	the
body.	 Carefully	 observing	 the	 signs	 of	 death,	 as	 indicated	 in	 the	
Natural
Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
(Chapter	8),	just	before	the	person	passes	away,	the	lama	should	immediately
begin	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	(the	first