ence	on	the	subtle	body	and	subtle	mind.	This
subtle	body	and	subtle	mind	are	seen	as	a	single	entity	that	has	two	facets.	The
aspect	which	has	the	quality	of	awareness,	which	can	reflect	and	has	the	power
of	cognition,	is	the	subtle	mind.	Simultaneously,	there	is	its	energy,	the	force	that
activates	the	mind	towards	its	object	-	this	is	the	subtle	body	or	subtle	wind.
These	two	inextricably	conjoined	qualities	are	regarded,	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,
as	the	ultimate	nature	of	a	person	and	are	identified	as	buddha	nature,	the
essential	or	actual	nature	of	mind.
Now,	before	we	look	more	closely	at	the	nature	of	the	subtle	body	and	mind,
let	us	look	at	how	the	gross	body	and	mind	are	thought	to	originate.	The	notion
of	dependent	origination	lies	at	the	very	heart	of	Buddhist	philosophy.	The
principle	of	dependent	origination	asserts	that	nothing	exists	in	its	own	right
independent	 of	 other	 factors.	 Things	 and	 events	 come	 into	 being	 only	 in
dependence	on	the	aggregation	of	multiple	causes	and	conditions.	The	process
through	which	the	external	world	and	the	sentient	beings	
within	it	revolve	in	a
cycle	of	existence	propelled	by	karmic	propensities	and	their	interaction	with
misapprehension,	attraction	and	aversion	and	conditions	is	described	in	terms	of
twelve	 interdependent	 links.	 Each	 cycle	 of	 the	 process	 begins	 with	 a
misapprehension	of	the	nature	of	actual	reality.	This	fundamental	ignorance	acts
as	a	condition	for	the	arising	of	the	propensities	created	by	our	past	actions,
mental,	verbal	and	physical,	which	condition	our	dualising	consciousness.	Our
dualising	consciousness,	in	turn,	conditions	the	qualities	and	mode	of	interaction
of	our	psycho-physical	aggregates,	which	condition	our	sensory	fields,	which
generate	 contact,	 which	 generates	 sensations,	 and	 then	 in	 turn	 attachment,

grasping,	and	maturation	towards	rebirth.	At	this	point	there	is	an	interaction
with	the	genetic	constituents	of	the	parents	and	subsequent	interaction	with	the
environment,	and	then	finally	we	have	birth,	ageing	and	death.	This	cycle	can	be
viewed	as	both	illustrating	the	underlying	processes	of	life,	death	and	rebirth	and
as	an	illustration	of	the	processes	to	be	transformed	on	the	path	to	liberation
from	suffering	in	cyclic	existence.
The	notion	that	there	is	a	connection	between	this	life	and	the	events	of	both
our	previous	existence	and	our	future	existence,	follows	from	the	Buddhist
understanding	of	the	natural	law	of	cause	and	effect.	For	example,	although	we
can	speak	of	yesterday’s	weather	and	today’s	weather	as	distinct,	today’s	weather
is	inextricably	linked	with	the	weather	patterns	of	yesterday.	Even	at	the	bodily
level,	in	the	case	of	our	physical	health	for	example,	we	know	that	events	in	the
past	affect	the	present	and	those	of	the	present	the	future.	Similarly,	in	the	realm
of	 consciousness	 the	 Buddhist	 view	 is	 that	 there	 is	 also	 this	 same	 causal
continuum	between	the	events	of	the	past,	present	and	future.
The	 Buddhist	 understanding	 of	 the	 continuity	 of	 personal	 experience,
including	our	memories,	can	also	be	considered	here.	The	Buddhist	view	is	that
the	continuity	of	personal	experience	is	primarily	founded	on	the	capacity	for
retention,	which	can	be	further	developed	during	one’s	meditative	practice	in	this
life.	However,	generally	speaking,	it	is	thought	that	if	a	person	dies	after	a
prolonged	period	of	illness	that	has	led	to	a	prolonged	degeneration	of	both
physical	and	mental	capacities,	there	will	be	a	greater	chance	of	many	of	the
personal	characteristics,	including	memories	etc.,	being	lost.	On	the	other	hand,
in	 the	 case	 of	 someone	 who	 dies	 a	 sudden	 death,	 when	 the	 mind-body
relationship	at	the	gross	
level	is	still	very	firm,	it	is	thought	that	there	is	a	greater
chance	 of	 carrying	 forward	 the	 acquired	 characteristics	 and	 memories,	
etc.
Nonetheless,	in	both	cases,	the	characteristics	carried	forward	from	a	previous
life	are	generally	thought	to	be	most