olour,	 holding	 in	 his	 [right]	 hand	 a	 jewel,	 seated	 on	 a	 horse	 throne	 and
embraced	by	his	supreme	consort	Māmak
ῑ.
	They	are	encircled	by	two	male
bodhisattvas,	Ākāśagarbha	and	Samantabhadra,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,
Mālyā	and	Dhūpā,	thus,	six	buddha-bodies	will	be	shining	before	you	from
within	a	space	of	rainbow	light.
A	yellow	light	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness,	which	is	the
natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	feeling,	yellow	and	dazzling,	adorned	by
greater	and	lesser	seminal	points	[of	light],	radiant,	clear	and	unbearable	to	the
eyes,	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Ratnasambhava	and	his	consort	and	will
shine	piercingly	before	you	at	the	level	of	your	heart	[with	such	brilliance]	that
your	eyes	cannot	bear	it.	Together	with	the	light	of	pristine	cognition,	a	dull	blue
light,	[indicative	of]	the	human	realm,	will	also	dawn	before	you	and	touch	your
heart.	At	that	time,	under	the	sway	of	pride,	you	will	[wish	to]	turn	away	in	fear
and	terror	from	the	bright	yellow	light	and	you	will	come	to	delight	in	the	dull
blue	light	of	the	human	realm	and	feel	attachment	towards	it.	At	that	moment,
abandon	your	fear	of	the	yellow	light,	and	recognise	it	as	pristine	cognition,
yellow	and	dazzling,	radiant	and	clear!	Let	your	awareness	relax	and	abide
directly	within	it,	in	a	state	of	non-activity.
46
	
Again	and	again,	have	confidence
in	it!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing	devotion!	If	you	recognise	it	as	the	natural
luminosity	 of	 your	 own	 awareness,	 even	 though	 you	 may	 feel	 no	 devotion
towards	it	and	have	not	recited	the	aspirational	prayer,	all	the	buddha-bodies

and	 light	 rays	 will	 dissolve	 inseparably	 into	 you	 and	 you	 will	 attain
buddhahood.	If	you	are	unable	to	recognise	
this	[radiance]	as	being	the	natural
luminosity	of	your	own	awareness,	then	pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is	the
light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge	in
it.’	This,	in	reality,	is	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava	come	to	escort	you
on	the	fearsome	dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate	state.	This	is	the	light-
ray	hook	of	Ratnasambhava’s	compassion!	Be	devoted	to	it!	Do	not	delight	in	the
dull	blue	light	of	the	human	realm.	This	[dull	light]	is	the	inviting	path	created
by	your	own	habitual	tendencies	for	deep-seated	pride,	which	you	yourself	have
generated.	If	you	become	attached	to	it,	you	will	tumble	down	into	the	human
realm,	you	will	experience	the	sufferings	of	birth,	old	age,	sickness	and	death,
and	there	will	be	no	[immediate]	opportunity	to	escape	from	the	swamp	of	cyclic
existence.	This	[dull	light]	is	an	obstacle	blocking	the	path	to	liberation!	Do	not
look	 at	 it!	 Abandon	 pride!	 Abandon	 your	 habitual	 tendencies!	 Do	 not	 be
attached	to	the	dull	blue	light!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be	devoted	to	the	yellow	light,
golden	and	dazzling.	Focus	intently	and	single-mindedly	on	the	transcendent
lord	Ratnasambhava	and	recite	the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	pride,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness.
May	the	supreme	consort	Māmak
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava,	and	you	will
attain	buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the	southern
Buddha	field	of	the	Glorious
	(
Śr
ῑ
mat
).
	
There	is	no	doubt	that	if	[the	deceased]	are	receptive	to	this	introduction,	they
will	attain	liberation,	however	weak	their	[individual]	ability	may	be.	Yet,	even
after	being	given	this	introduction	many	times,	there	are	some	whose	positive
opportunities	have	been	exhausted	by,	for	example,	their	great	nega