he	deities].	While	respectfully	narrating	this
eulogy	in	a	melodious	voice	and	enacting	the	hundredfold	homage,	one	should
mentally	admit	and	feel	remorse	for	all	one’s	negativities	and	obscurations,
which	have	been,	are	being	and	will	be	accumulated.
This	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration
	is	an	extraordinary
[method	for]	purifying	obscurations,	by	enacting	in	full	the	one	hundred	and	ten
homages
23
	to	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	Whatever	other	[confessional]
practices	one	may	[generally]	undertake,	such	as	the	
Reparation	and	Confession
of	the	Hells
,
24
	the	merits	accrued	by	one	who	practises	in	this	manner	are
immeasurable.	Therefore,	one	should	persevere	diligently	with	the	enactment	of
this	
Hundredfold	Homage
.
May	[the	influence	of	this]	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration
through	 [Enactment	 of]	 the	 Hundredfold	 Homage	 to	 the	 Hundred	 Sacred
Enlightened	Families	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	not	be	exhausted	until
cyclic	existence	has	been	emptied.
This	most	profound	teaching	is	an	ancillary	chapter	of	the	
Liberation	by
Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	a	supporting	text	to	the	
Reparation	and
Confession	of	the	Hells
,	and	a	synopsis	of	the	three	editions	[long,	medium	and
short]	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities:	The	Ritual	Purification	[entitled
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Feelings].
	 It	 should	 be	 propagated	 everywhere	 and
enacted	energetically	at	all	times	without	interruption.

7
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession
CONTEXT
In	addition	to	the	experiential	cultivation	of	the	nature	of	the	deity,	as
outlined	in	the	previous	two	chapters,	the	act	of	confession	plays	an
important	 role	 in	 purifying	 the	 negativity	 and	 obscuration	 that	 has,
according	 to	 the	 Buddhist	 perspective,	 clouded	 our	 minds	 over	 a
beginningless	cycle	of	lifetimes.
In	Buddhist	practice	this	process	of	purification,	which	includes	the
reparation	of	commitments	and	vows,	is	enhanced	by	the	engagement	of
the	‘four	antidotal	powers’.	In	the	context	of	this	cycle	of	teachings	the
four	powers	are:
1.	The	power	of	reliance,	which	here	refers	to	the	visualisation	of
the	hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
2.	 The	 power	 of	 the	 actual	 antidote,	 which	 here	 refers	 to	 the
recitation	of	the	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession
,
together	 with	 the	 practice	 of	 the	 Hundred-syllable	 Mantra	 of
Vajrasattva.
3.	 The	 power	 of	 remorse,	 which	 is	 the	 genuinely	 remorseful
recollection	of	all	negative	acts	previously	committed.
4.	 The	 power	 of	 resolve,	 which	 is	 the	 pledge	 never	 to	 engage
wilfully	in	such	negative	actions	again.
Before	beginning	the	confessional	practice,	it	is	recommended	that	the
practitioner	should	make	actual	or	mentally	emanated	offerings	before
his	or	her	altar.	Then,	each	afternoon,	while	sitting	on	the	floor	in	front	of
the	altar,	the	practitioner	should	engage	in	this	practice,	with	the	palms	of
the	 hands	 placed	 together,	 chanting	 the	 words	 lucidly	 and	 with
conviction.	 For	 as	 long	 as	 practitioners	 have	 not	 gained	 full
accomplishment	in	the	practices	of	this	cycle	of	teachings,	inappropriate
negative	 actions	 of	 body,	 speech	 and	 mind	 should	 be	 continuously

confessed.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession,	in	the
Presence	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
,
1
	an	extract	from	the	
Peace	ful
and	 Wrath	 ful	 Deities:	 A	 Pro	 found	 Sacred	 Teaching,	 [entitled]	 Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra,	Mahottara,
And	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities!
May	the	degenerations	[of	our	commitments]	be	purified!
	
In	order	that	the	degenerations	[of	our	commitments]	may	be	naturally	purified,
without	being	renounced,	the	[following]	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of
Confession,	in	the	Presence	of	the	Peace	ful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities
,	which	is	an
extract	from	the	
Peaceful