n	of	emptiness	and	luminosity.
Now,	when	the	subtle	mind	is	completely	pure,	the	body	or	energy	aspect	of
the	combination	of	subtle	mind	and	subtle	body	arises	as	the	five	different
coloured	luminosities	(white,	blue,	red,	yellow	and	green)	and	in	the	form	of
buddha-bodies.	 All	 the	 different	 maṇḍalas,	 of	 the	 hundred	 deities,	 or	 the
thousand	deities,	or	whatever	number,	are	all	expressions	of	the	five	enlightened
families,	which	are	related	to	the	purity	of	the	five	psycho-physical	aggregates,
the	five	elements	and	the	five	pristine	cognitions.	These	
relationships	form	the
core	of	the	practices	presented	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	as	does	the	experiential
cultivation	of	the	nature	of	these	deities	through	the	daily	practice.
So,	 in	 summary,	 by	 following	 in	 our	 practice	 the	 process	 of	 the	 natural
dissolution	of	our	gross	forms	of	consciousness,	and	the	natural	arising	from	this
state	of	the	luminosities	and	bodies	of	the	deities,	first	the	actualisation	of	inner
radiance	is	refined	and	this	serves	as	the	substantive	cause	for	the	arising	of	the
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource	 and	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Emanation
respectively.	Thus	the	three	bodies	of	a	buddha	are	perfected,	which	is	the
fruition	of	the	path	of	tantra.
Now,	as	for	the	forms	of	the	meditational	deity,	which	are	generated	in	the
practice	of	tantra,	there	are	two	principal	types:	peaceful	deities	and	wrathful
deities.	In	general	terms,	these	are	concerned	with	the	transformation	of	the
cognitive	 and	 emotional	 states	 associated	 with	 attachment	 and	 aversion
respectively.	The	peaceful	deities	are	quiescent	and	are	expressions	of	the	natural
purity	of	attraction,	that	is	the	mind	resting	in	its	natural	pristine	state.	The

wrathful	 deities	 are	 the	 dynamic	 aspect	 of	 the	 peaceful	 deities	 and	 are
expressions	of	the	natural	transformation	of	aversion.	That	is	they	represent	the
mind’s	active	transformation	of	delusion	into	pristine	cognition.
g
As	we	now	see,	the	path	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	involves	taking	dissonant
cognitive	states,	such	as	attachment	and	aversion,	on	to	the	path.	In	the	path
followed	 by	 pious	 attendants	 (
śrāvaka
)	 dissonant	 cognitive	 states	 are
categorically	perceived	as	something	to	be	renounced.	In	the	Mahāyāna	path,
however,	 there	 are	 two	 approaches	 which	 contrast	 with	 that	 of	 the	 pious
attendants.	According	to	the	Mahāyāna	sūtras,	if	a	certain	situation	suggests	a
positive	outcome	in	terms	of	benefiting	others	the	voluntary	use	of	desire	or
attachment	is	allowable.	However,	in	the	tantras	it	is	not	merely	that	desire	or
attachment	is	permissible	when	beneficial,	here	one	deliberately	utilises	their
energies	as	the	path	to	purifying	or	consuming	the	dissonant	states	themselves.
Given	that	the	practices	of	the	tantras	include	the	disciplined	engagement	of
subtle	physiological	processes	and	the	transformation	
of	the	energies	associated
with	attraction	and	aversion,	before	a	practitioner	can	embark	on	the	practices	of
tantra,	he	or	she	must	find	a	spiritual	teacher	who	meets	the	qualifications	as	set
out	in	the	authoritative	literature	and	must	receive	empowerments	and	graduated
instruction	from	that	master.	In	addition,	the	practitioner	should	complete	the
preliminary	practices	and	achieve	a	thorough	grounding	in	the	foundational
paths	of	the	sūtras,	which	includes	the	development	of	the	altruistic	intention	to
attain	 enlightenment	 (
bodhicitta
),	 the	 development	 of	 calm	 abiding	 -	 the
stabilisation	 of	 attention	 on	 an	 internal	 object	 of	 meditation	 -	 and	 the
development	of	penetrative	insight	-	an	analytical	meditative	state	that	dissects
the	 nature	 of	 its	 object,	 its	 relationships,	 characteristics	 and	 function.	 The
development	of	calm	abiding	and	penetrative	insight	are	the	means	by	which	the
practitioner	can	cultivate	his	or	her	understanding	of	emptiness,	which	is	an
appreciation	of	the	total	absence	of	inherent	existence	and	self-identity	with
respect	to	all	p