hance	 of	 carrying	 forward	 the	 acquired	 characteristics	 and	 memories,	
etc.
Nonetheless,	in	both	cases,	the	characteristics	carried	forward	from	a	previous
life	are	generally	thought	to	be	most	strongly	felt	at	an	early	stage	of	one’s
rebirth.	This	is	because	the	personal	characteristics	of	the	previous	life	are
thought,	 generally	 speaking,	 to	 be	 quickly	 overwhelmed	 by	 the	 developing
characteristics	inherited	from	the	parents	of	the	present	life.	Nonetheless,	as	I
have	mentioned,	much	depends	in	this	respect	on	the	individual’s	capacity	for
recall	and	this	capacity	for	recall	is	dependent	on	a	deepened	retentive	training
acquired	in	this	lifetime.
Now,	let	us	look	at	the	possible	states	of	existence	one	can	be	born	into.	From
the	Buddhist	perspective,	rebirth	in	conditioned	existence	can	take	place	in	one
of	three	realms:	the	formless	realm,	the	form	realm	or	the	desire	realm.	The	form

and	formless	realms	are	fruits	of	subtle	states	of	consciousness,	attained	upon	the
realisation	of	certain	meditative	concentrations.	Our	realm,	the	desire	realm,	is
the	most	gross	of	these	three.	Six	classes	of	beings	are	described	as	inhabiting
the	desire	realm:	gods	(mundane	celestial	beings	whose	primary	mental	state	is
exaltation),	antigods	(who	are	predominantly	hostile	and	jealous),	human	beings
(who	are	influenced	by	all	the	five	dissonant	mental	states),	animals	(who	are
under	the	sway	of	delusion),	anguished	spirits	(who	are	under	the	sway	of
attachment	and	unsatisfied	craving)	and	hell	beings	(who	are	overwhelmed	by
hatred,	anger	and	fear).	In	the	literature	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	the	evolution	of
all	the	three	realms	of	conditioned	existence	are	described	in	terms	of	differing
expressions	or	states	of	energy	and,	as	I	have	mentioned,	it	is	said	that	our
fundamental	ignorance	is	the	root	of	conditioned	existence	and	that	karmic
energy	is	its	activating	force.	In	the	Buddhist	view,	therefore,	it	is	the	nature	of
our	habitual	tendencies	that	generates	our	future	existence,	driven	by	the	natural
law	of	cause	and	effect.
Further,	when	we	observe	the	patterns	of	arising	and	subsiding	that	underlie
the	dynamic	nature	of	the	physical	environment,	the	cycle	of	days	and	nights	and
the	passing	of	the	seasons,	for	example,	and	we	observe	how	matter	arises	from
insubstantial	 subatomic	 particles	 and	 we	 look	 at	 the	 patterns	 of	 causal
connectedness	in	the	arising	and	dissolution	of	our	mental	experiences	from
moment	to	moment,	across	the	differing	phases	of	deep	sleep,	dreams	and	our
waking	state,	the	notion	of	continuity	of	
consciousness	can	come	to	be	seen	to	be
in	accord	with	both	the	nature	of	our	environment	and	the	nature	of	our	mental
experience.	Certainly,	it	has	often	been	argued	that	one	advantage	of	accepting
the	notion	of	continuity	of	consciousness	is	that	it	gives	us	a	more	profound
ability	to	understand	and	to	explain	the	nature	of	our	existence	and	of	the
universe.	In	addition,	this	notion	of	continuity	and	causal	interconnectedness
reinforces	a	sense	of	consequences	for	our	own	actions,	in	terms	of	both	the
impact	on	ourselves	and	the	impact	on	others	and	the	environment.
So,	in	summary,	when	considering	the	notion	of	continuity	of	consciousness
we	must	bear	in	mind	that	there	are	many	different	levels	of	greater	or	lesser
subtlety	in	the	states	of	consciousness.	For	example,	we	know	of	course	that
certain	qualities	of	sensory	perception	are	dependent	on	the	physical	constitution
of	 the	 individual	 and	 that	 when	 the	 physical	 body	 dies,	 the	 states	 of
consciousness	 associated	 with	 these	 sensory	 perceptions	 also	 cease.	 But,
although	 we	 know	 that	 the	 human	 body	 serves	 as	 a	 condition	 for	 human
consciousness,	the	question	still	remains:	what	is	the	nature	of	the	underlying

factor	or	essence	that	accounts	for	our	experience	of	consciousness	as	having	the
natural	quality	of	luminosity	and	awareness?
Finally,	then,	when	considering	the	interrelationship	between	mind,	body	and
the	e