evable	in	the	waking	state.
When	HH	Dilgo	Khyenste	Rinpoche	gave	his	commentary	to	the	text	he
explained	that	the	‘Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Reality’,	the	central
section	of	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’,	is	an	expression	of	the	esoteric
Thodgal	practices	of	Dzogchen,	the	‘Great	Perfection’	teachings.	Thodgal	is	the
pinnacle	of	meditative	practice	according	to	the	Nyingma	school	and	it	results	in
the	direct	experience	during	meditation	of	the	luminosities	and	the	maṇḍala	of
meditational	deities	that	are	described	in	Chapter	11.	This	arising	of	the	five-
coloured	luminosities	as	a	result	of	actualising	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	is	a
phenomenon	that	has	been	described	by	all	the	great	meditators	of	the	four	major
Buddhist	schools	of	Tibet	and	the	pre-Buddhist	Bon	tradition.	The	point	I	am
leading	up	to	here	is	that	the	experiences	described	in	our	text	relate	to	the
modalities	of	our	awareness	from	moment	to	moment,	in	our	waking	state,	in
deep	sleep,	in	our	dreams	and	also	during	the	transition	from	life	to	death	and

beyond.
In	this	sense	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’	can	be	read	as	a	wonderful
metaphorical	narrative	illustrating	the	processes	of	our	cognitive	state,	whether
in	our	waking	state	or	in	death.
Carl	Jung	in	his	commentary	to	Evans-Wentz’s	1927	edition	of	the	
Tibetan
Book	of	the	Dead
	spoke	about	how	compelling	he	found	it	to	look	at	‘The	Great
Liberation	by	Hearing’	backwards.	From	a	psychoanalytical	point	of	view	this	is
indeed	interesting,	as	our	text	can	then	be	seen	as	providing	a	guide	for	tracing
our	confused	and	deluded	states,	back	through	our	conditioned	attraction	and
aversion	to	selected	aspects	of	our	experience,	back	through	the	weave	of	our
habitual	tendencies	and	mental	constructs	and	a	relentless	series	of	voluntary	or
involuntary	mental	choices,	back	through	the	illusory	comfort	generated	by	our
sense	of	ego,	right	back	to	a	pure	original	cognitive	event.	This	is	something	that
we	 can	 explore	 during	 our	 own	 waking	 experience	 by	 analysing	 how	 our
thoughts	originate	in	the	mind,	interact	with	our	mental	constructs	and	guide	our
emotions	and	subsequent	actions.
Chapter	4	of	our	text,	‘The	Introduction	to	Awareness’,	addresses	this	process
of	exploration	directly.	Here	we	find	guidance	for	the	meditator	on	how	to
recognise	the	mind’s	ultimate	nature,	the	underlying,	mirror-like	pure	awareness,
free	from	dualistic	
elaboration,	from	which	all	our	thoughts	and	perceptions	arise
and	into	which	they	always	again	dissolve.	Chapter	11	then	gives	a	symbolic
description	of	how	the	pure	radiances	of	our	awareness,	the	ultimate	nature	of
our	 pure	 psycho-physical	 components	 and	 elemental	 properties,	 arise	 as
luminosities	and	meditational	deities.	At	this	critical	point,	either	we	recognise
these	luminosities	and	meditational	deities	as	the	embodiments	of	our	own	actual
nature,	and	thereby	remain	in	a	state	of	pure	perception,	or,	having	failed	to
recognise	their	appearance	as	being	a	natural	expression	of	the	ultimate	nature	of
all	phenomena,	we	are	then	inexorably	drawn	into	the	clouded,	dull	impulses	of
dualistic	experience.	Once	this	occurs,	the	matrix	of	our	habitual	tendencies	and
mental	 constructs	 is	 activated	 and	 this	 generates	 our	 sense	 of	 independent,
individual	identity.	By	now	our	ego,	which	cannot	accept	the	openness	and
clarity	of	the	pristine	perceptual	state,	is	established	and	the	mind	functions
purely	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 wanting	 to	 satisfy	 its	 conditioned	 expectations	 and
impulses,	from	moment	to	moment.
In	this	ego-bound	state	our	thoughts,	speech	and	actions	are	then	modulated
by	a	process	of	inner	judgement.	As	the	text	describes,	death	holds	up	an	all-
seeing	 mirror,	 ‘the	 mirror	 of	 past	 actions’,	 to	 our	 eyes,	 in	 which	 the

consequences	of	all	our	negative	and	positive	actions	are	clearly	seen	and	there
is	a	weighing	of	our	past	actions	in	the	light	of	their	consequences,	the	balance
of	which	will	determine	the	kind	of