the
buddhas	and	bodhisattvas	and	to	request	the	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas	to
be	their	refuge	and	guide.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas
and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
.
1
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Conquerors!
	
This	prayer	should	be	recited	at	the	time	of	one’s	own	death,	[or
whenever	appropriate].	First,	make	offerings,	both	actual	and	visualised,
to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels.	Then,	while	holding	fragrant	incense	in
one’s	hand,	say	the	following	words	with	fervent	intensity:
	
O,	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas,	abiding	in	the	ten	directions,	refuge	of
living	beings,	imbued	with	compassion,	imbued	with	knowledge,	imbued
with	clear	vision	and	imbued	with	love,	come	to	this	place,	by	the	power
of	your	compassion	and	accept	these	displayed	and	visualised	offerings!
O,	Compassionate	Ones,	as	you	are	the	fountain	of	all-knowing	pristine

cognition,	of	loving	compassion,	of	effective	activity,	and	of	a	power	to
grant	refuge,	beyond	conception,	[come	to	this	place!]
O,	Compassionate	Ones,	this	human	being,
	(say	the	name)
,	is	leaving
this	world	and	journeying	to	another	shore.	He
2
	
is	being	cast	off	from
this	 world	 and	 approaching	 the	 great	 transition	 of	 death.	 Suffering
deeply,	he	is	without	a	friend,	without	a	refuge,	without	a	protector	and
without	a	companion.	His	perception	of	this	life	is	fading	away.	He	is
moving	on	to	another	world,	entering	a	dense	darkness	and	falling	into
an	unfathomable	abyss.	Entering	the	thick	forest	of	doubt,	he	will	be
driven	on	by	the	potency	of	past	actions.	He	will	be	entering	a	great
wilderness,	borne	away	on	a	great	ocean,	and	driven	on	by	the	vital
winds	of	past	actions.	He	will	be	moving	in	a	direction	where	there	is	no
firm	 ground,	
entering	 a	 great	 battlefield,	 being	 seized	 by	 great
malevolent	forces	and	becoming	overwhelmed	by	fear	and	terror	upon
meeting	the	executors	of	the	unfailing	laws	of	cause	and	effect.	In	accord
with	his	past	actions,	powerless	[to	resist],	he	may	even,	yet	again,	be
entering	the	realms	of	rebirth.	The	time	has	come	when	he	has	no	choice
but	to	move	on,	alone,	leaving	his	dear	friends	behind.
O,	Compassionate	Ones,	grant	refuge	now	to	this	person
	(say	the
name)
,	who	has	no	refuge!	Protect	him!	Be	his	companion!	Defend	him
from	the	great	darkness	of	the	intermediate	state!	Turn	back	the	great
hurricane	of	past	actions!	Protect	him	from	the	great	fear	and	terror	of
the	unfailing	laws	of	cause	and	effect!	Rescue	him	from	the	long	and
dangerous	pathways	of	the	intermediate	state!	O,	Compassionate	Ones,
be	unsparing	in	your	compassion!	Grant	assistance	to	him!	Do	not	allow
him	to	be	expelled	into	the	three	kinds	of	inferior	existence.	Without
wavering	from	your	ancient	vows,	swiftly	release	the	power	of	your
compassion.	O,	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas,	for	the	sake	of	this	person
(say	the	name)
,	be	unsparing	in	your	compassion,	skilful	means	and
ability!	Seize	him	with	your	compassion!	Do	not	allow	[this]	sentient
being	to	fall	under	the	power	of	negative	past	actions!	O,	Three	Precious
Jewels,	protect	us	from	the	sufferings	of	the	intermediate	state!
	
This	
Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for
Assistance
	should	be	read	aloud	with	intense	devotion	three	times,	by
oneself	and	by	all	others	present.	May	its	impact	not	cease	until	cyclic
existence	has	been	emptied!

SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya
!	Let	good	auspices	prevail!
Herein	is	contained	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Rescues	from	the	Dangerous
Pathways	of	the	Intermediate	States
.
3
	
I	bow	down	to	the	spiritual	teachers,	[meditational	deities]	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
May	I	be	guided	on	the	path	by	their	great	love.
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	bewilderment,
May	the	spiritual	teachers,	holders	of	the	oral	lineages,	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	[radiant]	light,
Which	is	undistracted	study,	reflection	and	meditation.
May	the	supreme	consorts,	the	hosts	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	support	me	from	behind,
And