te	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual
tendencies,
May	the	four	Mahākrodha	male	gatekeepers	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined.
11
May	the	supreme	consorts,	the	four	female	gatekeepers,	support	us	from
behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.

	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	great
bliss	at	one’s	crown,
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	white	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Sakra,	sage	of	the	god	realms,	white	in	colour,	and	playing	a	lute.
May	he	obstruct	pride,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	god	realms!
	
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	one’s	occipital	channel,	which	resembles	the
horn	of	an	ox,
12
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	green	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Vemacitra,	sage	of	the	antigods,	green	in	colour,	bearing	armour	and
a	weapon,
May	he	obstruct	envy,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	antigod	realms!
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	one’s	‘life-force’	channel,	which	resembles	a
crystal	tube,
13
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	yellow	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Sākyamuni,	sage	of	human	beings,	yellow	in	colour,	and	carrying	a
mendicant’s	staff.
May	he	obstruct	attachment,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	human
realms!
	
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	energy	centre	of	one’s	navel,
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	blue	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Sthirasiṃha,	sage	of	animals,	blue	in	colour,	and	carrying	a	book.
May	he	obstruct	delusion,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	animal
realms!
	
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	channel	branch	at	one’s	bliss-sustaining
secret	place,
14
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	red	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Jvālamukha,	sage	of	the	anguished	spirits,	red	in	colour,	carrying	a
[wish-granting]	casket.
May	he	obstruct	miserliness,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	among	the
anguished-spirit	realms!
	

Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	energy	centre	at	the	soles	of	one’s	feet,
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	black	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Yama	Dharmarāja,	sage	of	the	hell	beings,	black	in	colour,	and
carrying	a	flame	and	water.
May	he	obstruct	aversion,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	among	the	hell
realms!
	
To	you,	the	six	sages,	the	Buddha-bodies	of	Emanation,
Who	act	for	the	benefit	of	living	beings,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual
tendencies,
May	the	three	sages	of	the	higher	realms	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined.
May	the	three	sages	of	the	lower	realms	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	light	paths	of	the	six	impure	states	[of	existence],
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
The	forty-two	deities	of	the	peaceful	assembly	blaze	with	rays	of	light:
Radiant,	vibrant,	resplendent,	and	naturally	beautiful.
Their	bodies	are	supple,	slender,	handsome,	upright,	and	youthful,
Exquisitely	ornamented	and	[splendidly]	endowed	with	the	major	and	minor
marks.
To	you,	the	assembled	peaceful	deities	of	the	indestructible	expanse,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	the	five	deep-seated
poisons,
May	all	the	peaceful	male	deities	draw	us	forward,

Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	five	pri