troduced	the	three
inner	classes	of	tantra:	Mahāyoga,	Anuyoga	and	Atiyoga.	These	tantra	texts	are
differentiated	on	the	basis	of	their	distinctive	meditative	techniques,	known
respectively	as	the	generation	stage,	the	perfection	stage	and	the	Great	Perfection
(Dzogchen).
All	 traditions	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism	 today	 share	 the	 inheritance	 of	 the
canonical	compilations	of	the	Indian	Buddhist	scriptures	and	treatises	contained
in	the	
Kangyur
	and	
Tengyur.
	The	former	contains	those	teachings	of	the	Buddhas
(vinaya,	 sūtras	 and	 tantras)	 that	 were	 translated	 from	 Sanskrit	 and	 other
languages	into	Tibetan,	mostly	from	the	late	tenth	century	onwards	and	compiled
initially	by	Buton	Rinchendrub	(1290	—	1364).	The	latter	includes	the	classical
Indian	commentaries	that	were	also	translated	from	Sanskrit	into	Tibetan.	In	a
recently	published	and	collated	master	edition	of	both	the	
Kangyur
	and	
Tengyur
these	texts	comprise	180	volumes.
At	the	same	time,	each	school	has	its	own	distinctive	writings.	The	particular
literature	of	the	Nyingma	school	comprises	translations	from	Sanskrit	and	other
languages,	which	are	preserved	in	the	twenty-six	volume	
Collected	Tantras	of
the	 Nyingmapa
	
(
rNying-ma’i	 rgyud-’bum
),	 and	 a	 companion	 anthology	 of
commentarial	treatises,	written	by	successive	generations	of	Indian	and	Tibetan
lineage	holders.	The	latter,	which	has	been	faithfully	handed	down	through	a
‘long	lineage	of	oral	precepts’	(
ring-brgyud	bka’-ma
),	that	is	to	say	through	an
unbroken	lineage	of	transmission	from	one	generation	of	accomplished	masters
to	the	next,	is	continually	growing	and	currently	comprises	120	volumes	in	a
recently	published	edition.
The	
Collected	 Tantras	 of	 the	 Nyingmapa
	 has	 three	 main	 sections,
corresponding	to	the	compilations	of	Atiyoga,	Anuyoga	and	Mahāyoga.	Among
them,	the	most	influential	single	text	is	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
,	a	revelation	of
the	 primordial	 buddha	 Samantabhadra,	 transmitted	 through	 Vajrasattva	 and
Guhyapati	Vajrapāṇi.	The	compendium	of	texts	that	we	now	know	as	the	
Tibetan
Book	of	the	Dead
	bases	its	symbolism	and	iconography	on	the	
Guhyagarbha
Tantra
.	Founded	on	the	classical	Abhidharma	
view	of	the	elements,	psycho-
physical	aggregates,	etc.,	this	tantra	text	is	the	earliest	known	literary	work	to
portray	 the	 natural	 purity	 and	 natural	 transformation	 of	 our	 mundane
psychological	 states,	 respectively,	 as	 the	 maṇḍala	 of	 the	 forty-two	 peaceful
deities	and	as	the	maṇḍala	of	the	fifty-eight	wrathful	deities.	Though	generally

and	rightly	classified	as	a	Mahāyoga	text,	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	has	also	been
obliquely	 interpreted	 from	 the	 perspective	 of	 Dzogchen,	 most	 famously	 by
Longchen	Rabjampa	(1308	—	63).	The	meditative	techniques	of	both	Mahāyoga
and	Dzogchen	are	clearly	expressed	among	the	chapters	of	our	present	work:	the
generation	stage	of	meditation	is	emphasised	in	Chapters	5-7,	and	the	Great
Perfection	in	Chapters	4	and	11,	these	latter	two	chapters	being	based	on	the
teachings	of	the	two	key	aspects	of	the	Great	Perfection,	namely	Cutting	through
Resistance	 (
khregs-chod
)	 and	 All-surpassing	 Realisation	 (
thod-rgal
)
respectively.	Thus	from	the	point	of	view	of	its	theoretical	foundation	and
practice,	as	well	as	in	its	iconography	and	symbolism,	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
	 echoes	 its	 roots	 in	 the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	 but,	 in	 addition,	 vividly
incorporates	the	classical	teachings	of	Dzogchen.
The	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	 was	 initially	 compiled	 by	 King	 Indrabhūti	 and
Kukkurāja	of	Sahor	in	north-west	India	(
circa
	sixth	century).	The	monarch,	also
known	as	King	Dza,	received	the	whole	corpus	of	the	Mahāyoga	tantras	in	a
vision	from	Vajrasattva,	and	Kukkurāja,	a	great	accomplished	master,	divided
this	literature	into	eighteen	books	(
tantras
)	—	the	most	all-embracing	of	which
is	the	
Guhyagarbha
.	During	the	eighth	century,	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	was
translated	into	Tibetan	from	Sanskrit	three	t