of	paces	equal
to	the	subject’s	age	in	years,	while	reciting	the	Heart-mantra	of	Dependent
Origination
15
	and	not	looking	back.
In	cases	when	the	hair	of	the	nape	of	the	neck	grows	upwards,	one	should

prepare	a	dough	with	black	seeds	and	[use	this	to]	make	a	substitute	effigy,	one
cubit	in	height.	Into	its	heart,	one	should	then	insert	a	number	of	crushed	berries,
equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years,	and	attach	a	label	bearing	the	subject’s	own
name.	The	hair	should	be	made	from	the	subject’s	cut	hair.	Blood	
should	be
drawn	from	the	subject’s	body,	and	smeared	on	its	face.	It	should	then	be
wrapped	in	the	subject’s	clothing	and	smeared	with	black	pigment.	Then,	at	one
hundred	and	twenty-one	paces	from	the	subject’s	own	dwelling,	one	should	dig	a
triangular	dark	pit,	and	recite	[RAṂ],	the	seed-syllable	of	the	element	fire,	a
number	of	times	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.	Then	repeat	the	following
words	three	times,	‘Black	demon!	Take	this	[effigy]!	This	is	important!	This	is
important!’	Then,	throw	it	into	the	pit,	defecate	upon	it,	cover	it	with	earth	and
run	away.	Then,	one	should	re-examine	[the	above	sign	of	death].	If	it	persists	as
before,	the	rite	will	not	have	been	effective	[and	need	not	be	repeated].	However,
there	is	no	doubt	that	if	other	[associated	signs]	have	not	been	[completely]
averted	by	a	single	performance	[of	the	rite],	they	will	be	successfully	averted
following	three	such	performances.
In	cases	when	the	indication	of	[protruding]	ankle	bones	appears,	one	should
face	westwards	towards	the	sun	when	it	is	close	to	setting,	and	remove	one’s
clothes.	Then	placing	a	dog’s	tail	under	you	and	some	excrement	in	a	heap	in
front,	one	should	eat	a	mouthful	and	bark	like	a	dog.	This	[rite]	should	be
repeated	three	times.
Also	in	cases	when	other	people	are	afflicted	by	illness:	if	the	roots	of	their
teeth	grow	grimy	and	black,	such	a	person	should	wear	a	goat’s	skin,	face	the
sunrise,	and	bleat	three	times	like	a	goat.	Similarly,	in	cases	when	the	nostrils	sag
inwards,	it	will	be	beneficial	if	one	visualises	the	syllable	A	on	the	tip	of	the
subject’s	nose,
16
	recites	the	syllable	A	twenty-one	times,	and	bathes	in	various
rivers.
In	cases	when	the	limbs	are	subject	to	repeated	spasms,	it	will	be	beneficial	if
one	draws	a	four-spoked	wheel	on	each	of	the	limbs	with	a	solution	of	shellac,
and	 bathes	 a	 number	 of	 times,	 equalling	 the	 subject’s	 age	 in	 years,	 in
[consecrated]	water	over	which	many	
dhāraṇ
ῑ
	mantras	have	been	recited.
In	cases	when	the	eyes	stare	fixedly,	one	should	prepare	a	bountiful	religious
feast	on	behalf	of	the	monastic	community;	and	hold	a	party	for	a	number	of
children,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.	One	should	also	wear	red	clothing.
In	cases	when	the	right	cheek	sags	inwards,	[for	the	rites	of	the	earth	element],
one	should	mould	a	number	of	small	terracotta	imprints,	equalling	the	subject’s
age	in	years.	For	the	rites	of	the	water	element	one	should	make	a	number	of

water	libations,	equalling	
the	subject’s	age	in	years;	for	the	rites	of	the	fire
element	one	should	make	a	number	of	burnt	offerings,	equalling	the	subject’s
age	in	years;	for	the	rites	of	the	wind	element,	one	should	erect	a	number	of
flags,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years;	and	for	the	rites	of	the	space	element,
one	should	recite	a	number	of	syllables	E,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.
Thereby,	there	is	no	doubt	that	[death]	will	be	ritually	deceived.
In	cases	when	the	breathing	becomes	agitated,	it	will	be	beneficial	and	[death]
will	be	averted	if	one	makes	a	concentrated	paste	of	molasses	over	which
[YAṂ],	the	seed-syllable	of	the	wind	element,	has	been	recited.
In	cases	when	the	nose	tilts	to	the	right	or	left,	one	should	visualise	a	white
syllable	HŪṂ	on	the	tip	of	the	nose.	In	cases	when	tears	flow	uncontrollably,
one	should	visualise	the	syllable	BHRŪṂ	on	the	subject’s	eyes.
17
	In	cases	when
the	left	cheek	sags	inwards,	one	should	visualise	the	syllable	KṢA	[on	the
cheek].
18
	In