greatest	 ability	 during	 the
intermediate	 state	 of	 the	 time	 of	 death	 when	 the	 inner	 radiance	 arises.
Additionally,	those	who	during	their	lifetime	emphasised	meditation	on	the	deity,
according	to	the	generation	and	perfection	stages	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra,
will	have	the	greatest	ability	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,	when	the
visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arise.
Given	the	above,	it	is	extremely	important	to	train	the	mind	particularly	in	this
Liberation	by	Hearing
,	while	one	is	alive.	It	should	be	embraced.	It	should	be
read	aloud.	It	should	be	thoroughly	comprehended.	It	should	be	taken	to	heart
perfectly.	It	should	be	read	aloud	three	times	[a	day],	without	fail.	Its	words	and
meaning	should	be	so	clearly	impressed	on	the	mind	that,	even	were	one	to	be

pursued	by	a	hundred	assassins,	its	text	and	meaning	would	not	be	forgotten.
This	being	called	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,	even	those	who	have
committed	the	five	inexpiable	crimes	will	attain	liberation	upon	hearing	[a
recitation	of	its	words].	Therefore,	it	should	be	read	aloud	in	public	places.	It
should	be	propagated.	Since	the	awareness	becomes	many	times	clearer	during
the	intermediate	state,	even	if	this	teaching	is	sensed,	as	now,	only	once,	and
even	if	its	meaning	is	not	understood,	it	will	be	remembered	at	the	time	[of
death],	without	a	single	word	being	forgotten.	Therefore	it	should	be	read	aloud
to	the	ears	of	all	during	their	lifetime.	It	should	be	read	aloud	across	the	pillows
of	all	who	are	sick.	It	should	be	read	aloud	in	the	presence	of	all	the	bodies	of
the	dead.	It	should	be	propagated,	far	and	wide.
To	meet	with	this	[teaching]	is	a	great	good	fortune.	Except	for	those	who
have	gathered	the	accumulations	[of	merit	and	pristine	cognition],	and	purified
their	obscurations,	it	is	difficult	to	encounter.	Yet,	once	it	is	heard,	liberation	can
be	achieved	just	by	avoiding	a	mistaken	view.
14
	Therefore	it	should	be	greatly
cherished.	It	is	the	essence	of	all	teachings.
This	completes	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	
reality,	which
forms	part	of	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	the
teaching	on	the	intermediate	states	which	liberates	just	by	being	heard,	or	just	by
being	seen.
COLOPHON
This	teaching	was	brought	forth	in	secret	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma
Lingpa,	the	eldest	son	of	the	accomplished	master	Nyinda	Sangye,	from	the
sacred	place	of	Mount	Gampodar,	which	resembles	a	dancing	god,	and	is	located
on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 river	 Serden.	 The	 master	 Karma	 Lingpa	 entrusted	 its
transmitted	precepts	and	authorisation	to	his	son,	Choje	Lingpa.	The	succession
fell	 in	 turn	 to	 his	 [son]	 Guru	 Suryacandra	 [i.e.	 Lama	 Nyinda]	 and,	 in	 his
presence,	I	Gaganadharmasamudra	[i.e.	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso]	received	it	with
devotion.

PART	THREE
An	Elucidation	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
Herein	is	contained	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,	an	introduction	to	and
elucidation	of	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth,	[which	is	an	extract	from]	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention.
1
	
I	 bow	 with	 respect	 to	 the	 spiritual	 teachers,	 and	 assembled	 meditational
deities.
May	they	effect	liberation	in	the	intermediate	state!
	
From	within	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
has	already	been	presented.	Here	then	follows	that	which	is	known	as	the
elucidation	of	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.
[INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	MENTAL	BODY]
Although	the	elucidation	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	has	already	been
given	many	times,	with	the	exception	of	those	who	are	greatly	experienced	in	the
meditations	 of	 the	 [sacred]	 teachings	 and	 those	 who	 have	 an	 excellent
inheritance	 of	 past	 actions,	 it	 is	 difficult	 for	 those	 lacking	 familiarity	 with
meditative	experience	and	those	with	a	negative	disposition	to	attain	re