consequences	of	all	our	negative	and	positive	actions	are	clearly	seen	and	there
is	a	weighing	of	our	past	actions	in	the	light	of	their	consequences,	the	balance
of	which	will	determine	the	kind	of	existence	or	mental	state	we	are	being	driven
to	enter.	The	‘life-review’	aspect	of	this	process,	metaphorically	described	in	our
text	as	the	weighing	of	white	pebbles,	representing	our	positive	actions,	against
the	weight	of	black	pebbles,	representing	our	negative	actions,	is	wonderfully
illustrated	 by	 the	 poet	 Heathcote	 Williams’	 phrase	 ‘death	 develops	 life’s
photographs’,	 which	 succinctly	 evokes	 the	 notion	 of	 our	 day-to-day
obliviousness	to	the	consequences	of	our	actions	being	developed	or	processed
in	death	so	that	we	can	experience	them	face	to	face.
Following	the	expansive	process	of	the	‘life-review’,	the	mind	is	then	driven
into	a	new	equilibrium,	avoiding	the	chaos	of	dissociation.	This	twofold	process
of	inner	judgement,	the	‘life-review’	followed	by	the	coalescence	of	the	mind
into	a	new	modality,	is	symbolically	represented	in	our	text	by	the	actions	of
Yama,	who	is	the	embodiment	of	the	infallible	laws	of	cause	
and	effect.	In	our
waking	 state,	 this	 weighing	 and	 modulation	 of	 the	 momentum	 of	 our	 past
thoughts,	speech	and	actions	is	of	course	largely	hidden,	but	we	do	experience
this	in	our	sense	of	‘conscience’	at	the	time	of	thinking,	speaking	or	acting.	In
death,	as	in	life,	the	process	of	inner	judgement	is	not	of	course	a	judgement	by
an	external	being	but	it	is	the	result	of	our	own	mind’s	innate	dynamic	of
manifesting	the	natural	fruition	of	our	own	mental	constructs	and	coalescing	this
ripening	into	a	new	equilibrium.	At	this	stage,	in	particular,	just	as	we	are	about
to	enter	a	changed	emotive	state,	it	is	absolutely	critical	that	we	recognise	the
fundamental	reality	that	we	are	experiencing	the	results	of	the	mental	states
which	 we	 ourselves	 have	 generated	 and	 that	 we	 use	 this	 understanding	 to
recognise	the	actual	nature	of	our	experience.	In	our	day-to-day	life	we	know
that	if	we	begin	to	feel	angry,	for	example,	this	immediately	creates	an	internal
disturbance	and	this	disturbance	creates	a	shift	in	the	way	we	perceive	both
others	and	our	environment,	which	in	turn	affects	the	way	in	which	others	react
to	us,	which	then	reinforces	our	initial	anger	and	we	feel	confirmed	in	that	new
state.	This	is	the	cycle	of	experiencing	the	results	of	the	mental	states	that	we
ourselves	 have	 generated,	 which	 can	 occur	 from	 moment	 to	 moment	 or
according	to	our	text	from	lifetime	to	lifetime.
Finally,	if	there	is	no	recognition	and	as	a	culmination	of	this	entire	process,
our	text	describes	how,	driven	on	by	a	relentless	search	for	security	and	the	urge
to	 resolve	 our	 impulses	 and	 expectations,	 in	 a	 mental	 realm	 where	 our
expectations	and	actual	reality	do	not	match,	and	based	on	the	ever-present

swinging	back	and	forth	of	our	attraction	and	aversion,	we	enter	into	an	emotive
state	whose	focus	can	be	anywhere	across	the	spectrum	of	elation,	jealousy,
pride,	confusion,	blankness,	desire,	craving,	anger,	hatred	or	fear.	These	states
are	depicted	in	our	text	as	the	realms	of	existence	into	which	we	may	pass	at
birth.
Given	the	above,	even	if	we	do	not	accept	the	Buddhist	understanding	that	the
modalities	of	our	consciousness	in	deep	sleep,	dreams	and	our	waking	state
mirror	 those	 of	 death,	 we	 can	 still	 apply	 the	 advice	 given	 in	 ‘The	 Great
Liberation	by	Hearing’	to	our	everyday	experience.	Giving	up	our	compulsive
attraction	and	aversion	to	aspects	of	our	perceptual	realm,	glimpsing	the	causal
dynamic	of	our	actual	condition	and	coming	to	the	realisation	that	what	we	see	is
the	product	of	our	own	mental	constructs,	and	that	
we	therefore	do	have	the
potential	to	view	our	experience	more	insightfully,	is	a	powerful	method	of
releasing	us	from	the	dissonant	and	perhaps	even	fearful	qualities	of	our	own
self-made,	perceptual	landscape.
Chapters	1-7	provid