).
Volume	3,	pp.	329-419.
2)	
The	Means	of	Establishing	the	Lineage	by	Carrying	Desire	onto	the	Path
and	the	Means	of	Closing	the	Womb	Entrances
	(
’Dod-chags	lam-khyer	rigs-
brgyud	bzhag-thabs-dang	mngal-sgo	’gag-thab	khol-du	phung-ba
).	Volume	3,
pp.	421-437.
3)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Supreme	Bliss:	A	Profound	Abridgement	of	the
Guidance	on	Supreme	Bliss	Attained	through	the	Sexual	Practices
	(
’Og-sgo	bde-
chen	’dod-chags	rang-grol-gyi	nyams-khrid	gud-sbas	don-bsdus	zab-khrid	bde-
ba	chen-po	rang-grol	zhes-bya-ba	shin-tu	zab-pa’i	nying-khu
),	composed	by
Nyinda	Ozer.	Volume	3,	pp.	439-481.
Protector	Rites	(
bstan-srung
)
1)	
Seven	Classes	of	Oath-bound	Protectors,	Associated	with	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Venomous	Hostile	Malevolent	Forces
and	Obstructors	through	Enlightened	Activity
	(
Zhi-khro	bka’-srung	dam-can
sde-bdun-gyi	
phrin-las	dgra-bgegs	gdug-pa	rang-grol
),	composed	by	Nyinda
Ozer.	Volume	3,	pp.	483-490.
2)	
Seven	Classes	of	Oath-bound	Protectors,	Associated	with	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	Venomous	Forces	through	Reparation
(
Zhi-khro	dam-can	sde-bdun-gyi	mdangs-bskang	gdug-pa	rang-grol
),	Volume	3,
pp.	491-498.
The	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	(
Padma	zhi-khro
)
1)	
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Rebirth:	 A	 Teaching	 Revealing	 the	 Natural
Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity,	through	the	Introduction	to	the	Intermediate
State	 of	 Rebirth
	 (
Srid-pa	 bar-do’i	 ngo-sprod	 dge-sdig	 rang-gzugs	 ston-pa’i
gdams-pa’am	me-long	srid-pa	rang-grol
),	contained	in	the	Delhi	offset	edition
of	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	pp.	499-533.	
See
Chapter	13,	Part	One.

Appendix	Two:	Symbolism	of	the	Maṇḍala	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
The	maṇḍala	represents	a	perfected	state	of	being,	and	the	central	deities	within
it	symbolise	the	perfected	states	of	the	meditator’s	own	awareness,	psycho-
physical	aggregates,	elemental	properties,	and	sensory	and	mental	processes.
The	peaceful	deities	represent	the	quiescent	natural	purity	of	these	fundamental
components	of	our	being	and	the	wrathful	deities	represent	the	transformative
aspects	of	these	energies,	which	bring	about	the	natural	transformation	of	the
most	enduring	and	deep-seated	expressions	of	our	mundane	perceptual	states.
Last,	the	outer	deities	of	the	maṇḍala	represent	the	modes	of	activity	of	an
enlightened	being.
The	exact	mapping	of	this	symbolism	does	vary	according	to	the	lineage	and
class	of	the	practice.	In	the	chart	presented	below,	the	correspondences	are	based
on	Chapter	5	of	the	present	work,	supplemented	by	correspondences	taken	from
other	texts	within	the	cycle,	with	certain	common	variances	noted.
The	Forty-two	Peaceful	Deities
The	male	and	female	primordial	buddhas:	Samantabadra	and
Samantabhadrῑ	in	union	represent	the	indivisible	union	of	pure	awareness
and	emptiness

The	five	female	buddhas:	Ākāśadhātvῑśvarῑ,	Buddhalocanā,	Māmakῑ,
Pāṇḍaravāsinῑ	and	Samayatārā,	represent	the	natural	purity	of	the	five
elements

The	eight	male	bodhisattvas:	Kṣitigarbha,	Maitreya,	Qamantabhadra,
Ākāśagarbha,	Avalokiteśvara,	Mañjuśrῑkumārabhūta,
Nivāraṇaviśkambhin	and	Vajrapāṇi,	represent	the	eight	classes	of
consciousness
N.B.	According	to	th	
Guhyagargha	Tantra
,	they	also	symbolise	the	four	senses
and	four	sense	organs.

The	eight	female	bodhisattvas:	Lāsyā,	Māmyā,	Dhūpā,	Gῑtā,	Ālokā,	Gandhā
and	Nartῑ,	represent	the	four	sense	objects	and	the	four	phases	of
conceptual	thought	(past,	present,	future	and	indeterminate),	or
alternatively	the	eight	objects	of	consciousness

The	four	male	gatekeepers:	Trailokyavijaya,	Yamāntaka,	Hayagrῑva	and
Amṛtakuṇḍalin,	represent	the	natural	purity	of	the	four	extreme	views	and
four	aspects	of	enlightened	activity

The	four	female	gatekeepers:	Aṅkuśā,	Pāśā,	Sphoṭā	and	Ghaṇṭā,	represent	the
natural	purity	of	the	four	types	of	birth	and	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations

The	Fifty-eight	Wrathful	Deities
The	six	peaceful	male	buddha