ama.	He	is	carrying	a	large	wooden	slate	in	his	right
hand,	and	in	his	left	he	holds	a	large	round	mirror.	Dressed	in	a	silk	brocade
gown,	he	is	seated	on	a	great	throne.	In	his	retinue,	there	is	a	figure	dressed	as

the	black	Ox-headed	Rakṣa	Demon,
6
	
wearing	an	ox-head	mask	and	holding	a
black	lasso.	Then,	seated	to	the	right,	there	is	another	figure	dressed	as	the
Monkey-headed	Elemental	Spirit,
7
	
with	the	face	of	a	monkey,	and	holding	a
weight	and	measure	in	his	hands.
8
	
Other	figures	also	present	include:	one
dressed	as	the	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit,
9
	
carrying	a	wooden	slate;	one
dressed	as	the	venomous	Snake-headed	Demon,
10
	
with	the	face	of	a	snake	and
carrying	a	mirror;	one	dressed	as	the	ferocious	Bear-headed	figure,
11
	
with	the
face	of	a	bear	and	holding	a	bellows;	one	dressed	as	the	awesome	Lion-headed
figure,
12
	
with	the	face	of	a	lion	and	clutching	a	hammer;	and	one	dressed	as	the
Garuḍa-headed	Bird	figure,
13
	
with	the	face	of	a	garuḍa	and	holding	a	saw.
These	figures	with	diverse	[animal]-heads	who	are	attired	similarly	to	Yama,	are
dignified	and	standing	in	rows,	to	the	right	and	left	of	Dharmarāja.
The	deity	representing	[the	deceased’s]	good	conscience
14
	
is	wearing	a	white
peaceful	mask	and	a	white	silk	robe,	and	is	carrying	a	bowl	filled	with	white
pebbles.	The	demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience
15
	
is	wearing
a	black	wrathful	mask	and	a	black	gown,	and	is	carrying	a	bowl	filled	with	black
pebbles.	Before	Dharmarāja,	on	the	right,	is	a	long	white	carpet,	which	is	rolled
out	like	a	white	pathway,	and	at	its	end	are	two	figures	dressed	in	the	costume	of
Mahākāruṇika,	with	one	face	and	four	arms,	and	bedecked	with	ornaments.	They
are	seated	at	the	end	[of	the	white	carpet]	on	a	throne	which	is	hidden	by	a
curtain.	On	the	left	side	is	a	long	black	carpet,	which	is	rolled	out	like	a	black
pathway,	and	it	leads	to	the	door	of	a	dark	room.
Hidden	elsewhere,	in	his	home,	is	a	person	named	the	late	Śr
ῑ
jāta	(‘gloriously
born’);
16
	
while	hidden	somewhere	in	the	corner	[of	the	stage],	is	someone
named	the	late	Lakṣanāraka	(‘hundred	thousand	hells’),
17
	
who	is	a	wrongdoing
outcaste
18
	
of	low	birth.
ACT	ONE
DHARMARĀJA	(
as	he	draws	a	cross	on	the	wooden	slate
):	O!	Ox-headed
Rakṣa,	it	seems	the	time	of	death	has	come	for	a	person	in	their	home	in	the
human	world;	the	indication	of	this	has	appeared	on	my	wooden	slate.

OX-HEADED	RAKṢA	(
calling	to	the	venomous	Snake-headed	Demon
):	O,
Venomous	Snake-headed	One!	Look	in	your	mirror!	What	is	this	deceased
person’s	country?	What	is	his	family	line?	And	what	is	his	name?	Please	look!
VENOMOUS	SNAKE-HEADED	DEMON:	O!	The	deceased	whose	time	has
come	is	from	the	country	of	Tāmradv
ῑ
pa	in	India,	and	he	lived	in	the	city	of
Sāntikāla,	which	is	a	township	of	butchers.	As	for	his	family	line,	he	belonged	to
the	lowest	social	class	of	the	four	classes;
19
	and	his	name	is	the	wrongdoing
Lakṣanāraka.	His	lifespan	has	come	to	an	end,	and	[thus	an	indication	of	this]
has	appeared	on	the	wooden	slate.	Now,	go	[and	fetch	him]!
(
Thereupon,	the	Ox-headed	Rakṣa,	the	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit,	and	the
demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	run	off,	while,	in	their
wake,	the	deity	representing	[the	deceased’s]	good	conscience	rushes	to	his
assistance.	As	soon	as	they	have	found	the	‘wrongdoing	one’	in	his	house	in	the
human	world,	they	tie	a	black	noose	around	his	neck,	and	then	Ox-headed
[Rakṣa]	and	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit	both	lead	him	away	by	the	hands.	The
demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	chases	him	from	behind,
carrying	 a	 load	 of	 black	 pebbles.	 Meanwhile,	 the	 deity	 representing	 [the
deceased’s]	good	conscience	places	[a	mere]	six	white	pebbles	in	the	bowl	for
white	pebbles,	and,	in	embarrassment,	tries	to	help.	Holding	a	white	scarf,	with
his	hands	folded	in	a	gesture	of	supplication,	he	attempts	to	petition	Ox-headed
Rakṣa	[on	behalf	of	the	deceased],	but	this	is	unsuccessful.	Lakṣanāraka	is	then