networks	 of	 flesh	 and	 blood,	 and	 roamed
throughout	cyclic	existence,
Thrust	into	[a	succession	of]	prison-like	existences,
Where	the	suffering	is	hard	to	bear.
All	my	transgressions,	resonant	with	such	unbearably	intense	suffering,
Have	been	born	out	of	my	own	past	actions.
Please,	through	your	great	compassion,	shatter	the	momentum	of	[these]	past
actions,
And	reverse	the	vital	energy	of	past	actions,	[generated	by]	dissonant	mental
states!
	
When,	overpowered	by	the	influence	of	perverse	past	actions	[rooted	in]
fundamental	ignorance,
I	wander	perpetually	within	the	darkness	of	unknowing,
Why	do	you	not	release	me,	[suffusing	me]	with	the	lamplight	of	your	pristine
cognition?
When	I	can	no	longer	bear	the	continuing	fruition	of	my	transgressions	and
past	actions,
Why	do	you	not	embrace	me	with	the	enlightened	activity	of	your	great

compassion?
When	I	fall	into	the	abyss	of	error,
Why	do	you	not	catch	me	in	the	palm	of	your	swift	compassion?
When	I	am	afflicted	by	the	irresistible	diseases	of	the	three	poisons,
Why	do	you	not	cure	me	with	the	medicine	of	your	compassionate	skilful
means?
When	the	fires	of	my	suffering	—	the	continuing	maturation	of	my	own	past
actions	—	blaze,
Why	do	you	not	release	a	compassionate	shower	of	cooling	rains?
When	I	sink	into	the	swamp	of	suffering	in	cyclic	existence,
Why	do	you	not	draw	me	up	with	the	hook	of	compassionate	skilful	means?
	
Were	I	to	attain	the	resultant	[states	of	enlightenment],
By	training,	again	and	again,	in	the	three	world-systems	of	cyclic	existence,
What	need	would	there	be	for	your	sublime	compassion	then?
Given	that	this	[release]	would	be	the	potent	inheritance	of	my	[positive]	past
actions,
Would	there	be	anyone	to	whom	I	would	need	to	express	my	gratitude?
[But],	 O	 spiritual	 warrior,	 you	 who	 are	 endowed	 with	 the	 power	 of
compassion,
Since	the	momentum	of	my	[negative]	past	actions	is	so	potent,
Do	not	be	ineffective!	Do	not	be	indifferent!	Do	not	be	inactive!
From	your	heart,	O	compassionate	conquering	deity,	gaze	upon	me	now!
Draw	me	up	from	the	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Lead	me	swiftly	to	the	supreme	level	of	the	three	buddha-bodies.
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	VIEW
OṂ	How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	dualises	subject	and	object,
When	the	expanse	of	reality	is	free	from	conceptual	elaboration!
How	deluded	we	have	been	by	our	grasping	at	characteristics!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,
Which	is	free	from	conceptual	elaboration!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	good	and	evil,

When	Samantabhadra,	[The	Ever	Perfect],	is	beyond	good	and	evil!
How	pitiful	we	are,	clinging	to	purity	and	impurity!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse,
Which	is	free	from	the	duality	of	good	and	evil!
	
How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	sees	buddhas	[as	great]	and	sentient	beings
[as	small],
When,	in	the	state	of	sameness,	there	is	neither	great	nor	small!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	great	and	small!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
sameness!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	this	life	and	the	next,
When	the	mind	of	enlightenment	is	free	from	birth	or	death!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	birth	and	death!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	deathless,	immutable	expanse!
	
How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	dualises	form	and	material	substance,
When	the	supreme	seminal	point	is	free	from	spatial	dimensions!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	corners	and
angles!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	supreme	seminal	point,	which	is	all-
embracing	in	its	symmetry
!
23
	
How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	dualises	beginning	and	end,
When	the	essential	nature	of	the	three	times	is	unchanging!
How	 deluded	 we	 have	 been	 in	 clinging	 to	 the	 dichotomy	 of	 transitional
processes!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	the	three	times,	which	is
unchanging!
	
How	debilit