these	[torma-offerings]	to	the	foot	of	a	palm	tree.
28
In	cases	when	the	[sign	known	as]	‘[one-legged	Yavati]	arising	[as	an	enemy]
against	the	leaves	of	the	Wish-granting	Tree’	occurs,	one	will	be	liberated	[from
the	indications	of	death],	if	one	perseveres	in	the	accumulation	[of	merit]	and
engages	in	virtuous	activities.
[CONCLUSION]
After	the	rituals	have	been	performed	according	to	the	above	instructions,	one
should	look	again	[for	the	visual	indications	of	death].	If	the	nature	of	their
appearance	has	altered,	the	indications	will	undoubtedly	be	averted	if	the	rites
are	repeated	from	seven	to	twenty-one	times,	or	a	number	of	times	equalling	the
subject’s	age	in	years.
This	completes	the	esoteric	instruction	concerning	the	ritual	
aversion	of	death,
which	was	composed	by	the	master	Padmasambhava,	as	a	means	of	liberating
sentient	beings	from	their	sufferings.	May	it	be	encountered	by	one	of	worthy
past	actions!
	
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
This	is	a	treasure-teaching	revealed	by	the	treasure-finder	Karma	Lingpa.

10
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through
Recollection
CONTEXT
Practitioners	 of	 this	 cycle	 of	 teachings	 who	 commence	 with	 the
Preliminary	Practice
	(Chapter	1),	and	purify	all	their	negativity	and
obscurations,	generated	by	their	past	actions,	through	the	practice	of	the
Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
,	the	
Hundredfold	Homage
	and
the	
Confession
	(Chapters	5-7),	and	who	also	experientially	cultivate	the
practices	described	in	the	
Introduction	to	Awareness
	
(Chapter	4),	will,	in
the	best	of	cases,	attain	liberation	from	cyclic	existence	in	this	very
lifetime.
However,	those	who	are	unable	to	realise	this	level	of	achievement
should	 implement	 the	 instructions	 on	 consciousness	 transference
described	in	this	chapter	at	the	time	of	their	own	death.
This	wonderful	practice	is	classed	among	the	few	that	do	not	require
previous	experience	of	Vajrayāna	meditational	practices	in	order	to	be
effective.	Once	guidance	has	been	received	from	a	qualified	spiritual
teacher,	the	practitioner	should	follow	the	course	of	training,	outlined	in
this	 chapter,	 until	 the	 signs	 of	 accomplishment	 arise.	 Then,	 the
practitioner	should	maintain	this	proficiency	throughout	his	or	her	life.
It	is	regarded	as	extremely	beneficial	if	those	that	are	accomplished	in
this	practice	perform	this	consciousness	transference	in	support	of	other
people	or	animals	when	they	are	dying.	This	should	be	begun	during	the
interval	between	the	cessation	of	the	outer	respiration	and	the	cessation
of	the	inner	respiration,	at	the	point	when	the	mind	and	body	separate,
and	can	be	continued	for	an	appropriate	period	after	death.
As	the	text	stresses,	at	the	time	of	the	practitioner’s	own	death,	it	is
critically	important	that	this	technique	is	only	actually	implemented	at
the	exact	moment	of	death.

Herein	is	contained	an	oral	instruction	entitled	
Consciousness	 Transference:
Natural	Liberation	[through	Recollection]
,
1
	which	relates	to	the	intermediate
state	of	the	time	of	death.	This	is	the	fourth	topic	in	the	
Guide	to	the	Six
Intermediate	States	according	to	the	Perfection	Stage
,
2
	which	is	an	extract	from
the	
Peaceful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities:	A	Pro	found	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
3
INTRODUCTION
This	
Consciousness	 Transference:	 Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Recollection
,
which	is	the	fourth	topic	[in	the	
Guide	to	the	Six	Intermediate	States	according
to	 the	 Perfection	 Stage
,	 and	 which	 specifically	 contains]	 guidance	 on	 the
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	will	[now]	be	presented.
4
This	
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through	Recollection
	is
a	 powerful	 method,	 a	 means	 for	 attaining	 buddhahood	 which	 does	 not
[necessarily]	 require	 meditation.	 This	 oral	 instruction	 through	 which
buddhahood	can	be	attained	at	the	time	of	death	is	[therefore]	most	valuable	for
those	who	have	not	tra