o	to	such	a	place!
Though	I	really	do	have	compassion	for	you,
I	am	nonetheless	very,	very	satisfied!
You	must	carry	on	your	back	the	weight	and	measure,
Which	you	used	as	a	fraudulent	weight	and	measure!
You	must	wear	at	your	side	the	weapons
With	which	you	killed	many	sentient	beings!
You	cannot	deny	or	misrepresent	these	things!
Now	the	time	has	come	for	you	to	go
To	the	citadels	of	the	eighteen	hells.
(
He	begins	to	lead	[Lakṣanāraka]	away.
)
DHARMARĀJA:
Alas!	How	pitiful!	How	terrifying!
When	one	has	obtained	a	human	form,
One	should	proceed,	with	highly	purposeful	virtuous	conduct,
On	the	path	of	liberation,	where	inferior	rebirths	are	left	behind;
And	[thus]	one	is	never	separated	from	peace	and	happiness.
But	on	this	occasion	when	you	obtained	a	human	life,
You	threw	away	positive	actions	like	dirt,
And	seized	upon	negative	actions,
For	which	reason	you	have	wasted	this	highly	meaningful	human	body,
Which	is	difficult	to	obtain.
Since	you	have	done	nothing	at	all,	other	than	return	empty-handed	[from	this
life],
You	are	[only]	carrying	the	burden	of	your	negative	acts!	How	sad!
Since	the	actions	you	have	carried	out	must	ripen	upon	yourself,
You	cannot	be	protected	even	by	the	power	of	a	thousand	buddhas.
So	I	cannot	respond	to	this,	[your	appeal],	in	any	way!
Since	the	results	of	the	premeditated	negative	acts,
Which	you	carried	out	when	you	had	freedom,
Will	all	come	to	ripen	upon	you,
Even	though	you	wail	and	lament,
No	one	at	all	should	feel	sorry	for	you.
Even	though	you	have	hopes	in	me,
I	have	no	means	to	act	in	any	way.
Since	this	mirror	of	past	actions,	which	reflects	phenomenal	existence,

Truly	depicts	the	natural	expression	of	virtuous	and	negative	acts,
How	can	it	be	that	no	past	actions	will	appear	in	the	case	of	wrongdoers?
When	the	deity	who	is	your	good	conscience
And	the	demon	who	is	your	bad	conscience
Compare	the	black	and	white	pebbles	of	past	actions,
Happy	is	the	man	who	has	accumulated	virtue!
How	very	remorseful	are	you,	who	have	accumulated	evil!
On	this	dangerous	red	passageway	traversed	by	all,
When	you	are	brought	to	trial	by	the	executors	of	Yama’s	rites,
Even	though	you	may	have	been	once	very	powerful,
Here,	it	will	be	of	no	avail!
Now	is	the	time	for	the	hearts	and	lungs	of	all	great	wrongdoers	to	be	torn
apart!
Since	you	have	practised	non-virtue,
This	reckoning	of	your	past	actions
Will	be	quicker	and	more	powerful	than	lightning,
So	by	fleeing	you	will	not	escape,
And	by	showing	remorse,	this	will	be	of	no	help!
How	pitiful	are	the	human	beings	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa
Who	do	not	strive	to	practise	the	[sacred]	teachings!
There	will	be	no	way	of	helping	them.
This	detailed	accounting	of	positive	and	negative	past	actions
Forbids	even	the	most	minute	negative	deeds	-
So	what	are	those	humans	who	have	no	scruples	thinking	of!
Though	the	white	path	of	liberation	leads	to	joy,
And	the	black	path	of	inferior	rebirth	leads	to	suffering,
The	humans	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa	do	not	abandon	negative	actions,
Nor	do	they	practise	positive	actions,
[And],	even	though	they	may	feel	sadness	and	remorse,
Past	actions	cannot	be	remade.
One’s	past	actions	accompany	one’s	body	like	a	shadow.
I	hold	all	rewards	in	respect	of	positive	virtues,
And	I	exact	punishments	in	respect	of	negative	deeds.
Judging	the	balance	and	counterbalance,
I	examine	good	and	bad	actions.
So	even	though	you	have	regrets,	I	cannot	redo	anything.
Now,	even	though	I	am	very	merciful,	there	is	still	no	way	that	I	can	help	you.

Once	you	take	the	black	path	to	the	hell	realms,
You	cannot	be	saved,	even	if	you	were	to	be	engulfed	by	the	compassion	of
the	Sublime	Ones.
So	there	is	absolutely	no	way	for	me	to	do	anything.
The	Conqueror	has	said	that	sentient	beings	must	reap	[the	fruits	of]	their	own
past	actions.
So	now	the	Ox-headed	One	will	lead	you	away!
May	your	negativity	and	obscurations	be	quickly	purified,
And	may	you	then	attain	the	ultimate	level	of	the	buddhas.
	
OX-HEADED	RAKṢA:	Since	it	is	your	own	doing,	even	though	you	may
have	regret