is	bad	past	actions,	he	has	been	led	away	to	the	hells	by	the
executors	of	Yama’s	rites.	Although	I	wanted	to	guide	him	to	higher	rebirths,	I
have	been	unable	to	find	a	way	[to	help	him].
All	of	you	who	inhabit	the	human	world	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa,	and	all	of	you
gathered	here,	should	not	now	engage	in	negative	actions	but	practise	only
virtue.	These	following	messages	are	the	ones	which	we	[now]	send	to	you
[from	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth]!	(
Then,	circumambulating	the	maṇḍala,
4
and	chanting	the	Six-syllable	Mantra	in	a	melodious	voice,	he	continues	with	a
sad	demeanour.
)
	
How	wonderful!	I	pray	to	gracious	Dharmarāja,
Glorious	embodiment	of	the	activities	of	the	buddhas	of	the	three	times,
Who	manifests	for	the	benefit	of	beings!
Alas!	Listen	and	be	attentive,	all	you	gathered	here!
[Considering]	the	difficulties	of	obtaining	a	human	form,
All	those	who	commit	non-virtuous	and	negative	acts	[while	living	in	the
world]
Will	have	missed	the	opportunity	of	escaping	from	this	ocean	of	suffering.
All	[such]	beings	living	in	this	world,
Who	are	[all]	powerless	to	remain	[in	the	world]	for	long,
Will	feel	remorse	when	entering	the	jaws	of	the	Lord	of	Death.
But	[this	remorse]	will	be	of	no	benefit	to	them	then	-
For,	despite	their	sorrows,	they	will	be	obliged	to	move	on!
All	peoples	of	the	past	have	gathered	family	and	wealth	[around	them],
Hoping	these	would	last	forever	-
But,	when	[their	own]	impermanence	and	death	arrive,
They	set	out	alone,	devoid	of	refuge	or	sanctuary.
The	relatives	and	friends	surrounding	us	in	this	life
Are	like	a	gathering	of	shoppers	at	a	market.
Although	they	seem	close	to	us,	they	are	not	dependable.
When	the	market	closes,	the	shoppers	will	disperse.
[Likewise,]	this	illusory	aggregate	of	form,

Like	a	fallen	cairn	at	the	top	of	a	pass,
Will	be	severed	of	all	its	flesh	and	bones.
This	our	body	is	not	to	be	relied	on!
Even	though	we	have	cherished	this	body,
[A	collection]	of	pus,	blood,	serum,	and	sinews,
It	is	nonetheless	[ever]	on	the	verge	of	disintegration.
Even	though	we	miss	it,	birds	and	dogs	will	devour	it,
Even	though	we	[try	to	sustain	it	by]	engaging	in	ritual	services,
It	will	be	snatched	away	by	Yama,	the	lord	of	death.
This	body	composed	of	the	four	elements	will	be	left	behind	on	the	earth,
Our	consciousness	will	travel	as	a	wanderer	through	the	intermediate	states,
And	the	habitual	tendencies	of	our	negative	past	actions	will	follow	like	a
shadow.
How	pitiful	that	we	have	committed	non-virtuous	actions!
The	deity	and	demon	representing	our	good	and	bad	conscience
Will	compare	the	white	and	black	pebbles	of	past	actions,
And	Dharmarāja	will	reveal	all	in	the	[all-seeing]	mirror.
All	great	wrongdoers	will	suffer	these	torments.
Even	though	they	should	not	commit	even	the	slightest	negative	acts,
The	human	beings	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa	are	let	down	by	wrongdoing!
It	is	by	engaging	in	virtue	that	they	will	be	reborn	in	the	higher	realms,
And	by	engaging	in	negativity	that	they	will	travel	to	the	hells.
At	this	one	time,	when	one	has	attained	a	human	body,
But	failed	to	return	with	at	least	some	virtue,
What	a	pity	it	is	that	we	carry	the	[alternative]	burden	of	negativity,
And	bring	sufferings	upon	ourselves!
The	hunters	in	the	mountains,
The	fishermen	by	the	rivers,
And	those	who	kill	domestic	livestock
Will	transmigrate	and	be	reborn	in	the	eighteen	hells.
Those	who	engage	in	deceit	and	deception,
Having	adulterated	measures	and	weights,
And	those	who	steal,	plunder	or	deceive
Will	long	roam	through	the	three	inferior	existences.
Those	bound	to	their	wealth	by	the	knot	of	miserliness,
Those	who	squander	the	property	of	others,
And	those	who	appropriate	donations	made	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels,

Will	long	roam	through	the	realms	of	anguished	spirits.
This,	the	impact	of	non-virtuous	past	actions
Is	like	a	thunderbolt,	it	is	extremely	powerful.
And	even	though	we	feel	remorse,	it	will	be	of	no	help	-
We	will	not	be	able	to	escape!
The	punishment	for	negative	actions	is	exacted	by	Yama.
I