ally	 able	 to	 clarify	 obscure	 readings	 and	 eliminate	 many
cumbersome	and	unnecessary	annotations	by	basing	our	translation	on	the	three-
volume	 Dudjom	 edition	 of	 the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 Natural
Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
.	Seldom	have	we	opted	for	readings	based
on	 the	 two	 Indian	 reprints	 of	
The	 Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing	 in	 the
Intermediate	 States
	 at	 our	 disposal,	 the	 Delhi	 and	 Varanasi	 photo-offset
publications,	and	when	we	have	done	so,	we	have	indicated	the	reason	for	our
choice	in	the	notes.	We	have	not,	however,	made	reference	to	the	new	Amdo
edition,	compiled	by	Khenpo	Dorje	and	just	published	in	Hong	Kong.

Readers	wishing	to	understand	the	precise	relationship	between	the	chapters
of	the	derivative	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	and	the
larger	cycle	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
,	are	referred	to	Appendix	One,
where	the	correspondences	are	presented.
As	stated	above,	this	is	the	first	complete	English	translation	of	
The	Great
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	otherwise	known	to	the	outside
world	as	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
,	and	it	is	based	on	a	version	of	the
original	text	which	has	proven	to	be	far	more	accurate	than	those	used	in
previous	translations.	All	the	chapters	of	the	anthology	standardised	by	Nyima
Drakpa	and	later	published	in	woodblock	form	at	Dzogchen	Monastery	are
contained	in	this	book.	With	the	exception	of	Chapter	13,	Part	One,	which	may
well	 derive	 from	 the	 non-extant	
Lotus	 Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities
,	 and
Chapter	13,	Part	Two,	which	was	composed	by	Gyarawa	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso,
all	the	other	chapters	from	Nyima	Drakpa’s	compilation	appear	to	have	been
taken	from	the	original	treasure-cycle	of	Karma	Lingpa’s	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities
.
In	presenting	our	translation,	we	have	sought	to	order	the	chapters	according
to	the	meaningful	sequence	of	the	intermediate	states	that	arise	in	the	course	of
life	and	death,	and	therefore	the	order	of	the	chapters	in	this	translation	differs
from	the	arrangement	of	Nyima	Drakpa.	In	addition,	we	have	included	two
further	chapters	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	that	are	not	part	of	
The
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
.	Chapter	1,	outlining	the
preliminary	practices	of	meditation,	is	attributed	to	Nyinda	Choje	and	Nyinda
Ozer,	while	Chapter	10,	on	consciousness	transference,	derives	from	Karma
Lingpa’s	
Six	Guidebooks	of	the	Perfection	Stage
	of	meditation.	The	first	of	these
has	been	included	because	it	provides	an	essential	context	to	the	later	chapters,
and	the	instructions	on	consciousness	transference	have	been	included	because
they	are	specifically	mentioned	in	Chapter	11,	as	a	necessary	practice	related	to
the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death.

1
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nature	of	Mind:	The	Four-session	Yoga
of	the	Preliminary	Practice
CONTEXT
In	its	original	Tibetan	this	preliminary	practice	is	beautifully	written	in
verse.	In	the	monasteries	and	lay	households	of	the	practitioners	of	this
cycle	of	teachings,	it	is	usually	sung	melodically	in	the	early	morning,
before	any	other	practice	or	activity	is	begun.	Often	the	young	monks
sing	the	opening	verses	of	this	poem	as	they	go	about	their	morning
duties.
When	engaging	in	a	preliminary	retreat,	it	is	recommended	that	this
meditation	is	done	every	day	in	four	sessions:	early	morning	till	dawn,
after	sunrise	until	just	before	noon,	from	afternoon	until	just	before
sunset,	and	from	sunset	until	late	evening.
The	practice	essentialises	the	‘four	common	or	outer	preliminaries’	and
the	‘five	uncommon	or	inner	preliminaries’,	which	are	described	in	the
glossary.	 It	 is	 recommended	 that	 the	 inner	 preliminary	 practices	 are
repeated	100,000	times	as	a	prerequisite	to	receiving	instruction	on	the
‘generation	 stage’	 practices	 of	 the	 Vehicle	 of	 Indestructible	 Reality
(
Vajrayāna
).
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nat