way!
May	your	negativity	and	obscurations	be	quickly	purified,
And	may	you	then	attain	the	ultimate	level	of	the	buddhas.
	
OX-HEADED	RAKṢA:	Since	it	is	your	own	doing,	even	though	you	may
have	regrets,	what	is	the	use	of	that!	As	for	us,	we	are	not	responsible	[for	your
actions]!	We	have	simply	distinguished	between	truth	and	lies.	If	you	had	no
responsibility	for	your	past	actions,	then	it	would	be	meaningless	for	us	to	harm
you.	Now,	as	this	is	[the	outcome	of]	your	past	actions,	be	off	quickly!
(
Then	he	leads	[Lakṣanāraka]	away	by	a	black	noose,	and	the	black	demon
[representing	the	bad	conscience]	drives	him	from	behind,	goading	him	along
the	path	represented	by	the	black	carpet.	Then	in	a	dark	room	he	is	subjected	to
shouts	of	‘Strike!	Kill!’,	which	cause	him	to	cry	out	in	all	sorts	of	ways.
)
THE	SPIRITUAL	TEACHER	(
then	makes	a	detailed	elucidation,	beginning
with	the	words
):	O,	Children	of	Buddha	Nature,	those	who	have	committed	evil
deeds	will	be	singled	out	in	this	manner	and	their	sufferings	will	be	the	same	[as
those	described	here].	You	will	definitely	have	such	experiences.	So,	whether
this	core	dilemma	besets	you	at	this	time	or	not	will	depend	on	you	yourselves.
From	now	onwards,	it	is	therefore	important	for	you	to	strive	after	virtue,	and
avoid	negativity,	O,	Children	of	Buddha	Nature...
ACT	TWO
DHARMARĀJA	(
as	he	draws	a	cross	on	his	wooden	slate
):	Alas!	Ox-headed
Rakṣa,	there	is	someone	from	a	household	in	the	human	world	whose	lifespan
has	come	to	an	end.	This	sign	has	appeared	on	my	wooden	slate.
OX-HEADED	RAKṢA	(
calling	to	the	venomous	Snake-headed	Demon
):	O
Venomous	Snake-headed	One,	look	in	your	mirror!	Look	and	see	where	the
deceased	is!
VENOMOUS	SNAKE-HEADED	DEMON:	The	land	of	the	one	whose	time

has	come,	is	in	north-east	India.	The	city	is	called	Kāmarūpa.
25
	His	social	class,
among	 the	 four	 classes,	 is	 the	 mercantile	 class,
26
	 and	 his	 name	 is	 the
householder,	Śr
ῑ
jāta.	His	lifespan	and	merits	have	been	exhausted,	so	the	sign	of
this	has	appeared	on	the	wooden	slate.	Now	be	off,	quickly	[and	fetch	him]!
(
So,	all	three,	Ox-headed	Rakṣa,	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit,	and	the	demon
representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	run	off,	while	in	their	wake,	the
deity	representing	[the	deceased’s]	good	conscience	rushes	to	his	assistance.	As
soon	 as	 they	 have	 found	 the	 householder,	 Śr
ῑ
jāta,	 in	 the	 human	 world	 at
Kāmarūpa,	the	Ox-headed	One	leads	him	away	and	the	Boar-headed	One	holds
his	arm,	as	the	demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	chases	him
from	 behind.	 Meanwhile,	 the	 deity	 representing	 the	 good	 conscience	 offers
assistance	as	the	deceased	is	brought	into	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja,	who
questions	him.
)
DHARMARĀJA:	O,	deceased	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	have	you	not	come
from	the	human	world?	There	you	had	a	human	body	endowed	with	freedom	and
favourable	opportunities,	which	is	difficult	to	acquire.	You	have	encountered	the
Buddha’s	teachings,	which	are	difficult	to	encounter;	and	you	have	been	born	as
a	man	
in	Jambudv
ῑ
pa,	where	it	is	difficult	to	take	birth.	What	positive	or	virtuous
past	actions	have	you	gathered?	When	you	lived	in	the	human	world,	did	you
practise	 the	 [sacred]	 teachings	 mindful	 of	 [cultivating]	 mental	 virtues	 and
physical	purity?	What	compounded	virtues	and	attributes	do	you	possess	that
would	 enable	 you	 to	 be	 saved	 [from	 rebirth	 in	 the	 hells]?	 Did	 you	 create
[images,	books	and	stūpas]	representative	of	buddha-body,	speech	and	mind?
Did	you	commission	the	writing	and	recitation	of	the	scriptures?	Did	you	mould
terracotta	imprints?	Did	you	offer	water	libations?	Did	you	clear	rocks	from
roads?	Did	you	remove	bothersome	thorns	from	bad	roads?	Did	you	make
offerings	to	those	above?	Did	you	bestow	charity	on	those	below?	Did	you
scatter	barley	dough	and	grain	at	anthills?	What	other	subtle	acts	of	virtue	did
you	accumulate,	over	and	above	these?	Also,	did	you	study,	reflect	and	meditate
[on	the	Buddhist