ul	and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	

In	the	palace	of	reality’s	expanse,	pure	and	pervasive,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	—
Uncreated	and	free	from	conceptual	elaboration.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.
I	request	the	primordially	pure	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
3
So	that	naturally	arising	pristine	cognition
Is	uncontrived	and	spontaneously	present,
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	ignorance	and	delusion.
	
In	the	palace	of	great	bliss,	which	is	pristine	cognition,	radiant	and	pure,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	—
Unimpeded	and	supremely	blissful.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.
I	request	the	spontaneously	present	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,
4
So	that	intrinsic	awareness,	which	is	pristine	cognition,
Is	naturally	liberated	in	supreme	bliss,
5
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	desire	and	clinging.
In	the	palace	of	the	lotus,	untainted	and	pure,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	—
Naturally	arising	in	unlimited	forms,	beyond	determination.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.
I	request	the	naturally	liberating	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation,
So	that	intrinsic	awareness,	which	is	naturally	manifesting
Pristine	cognition,	naturally	radiates,
6
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	discordant	views	and	aversion.
	
In	the	palace	of	intrinsic	awareness,	the	genuine	inner	radiance,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	[the	unity	of]	the	three	buddha-bodies	—	Beyond
spatial	delineation,	and	supremely	blissful.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.

I	request	the	supremely	blissful	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Three	Buddha-bodies,
So	that	naturally	arising	pristine	cognition
Is	spontaneously	present	as	the	three	buddha-bodies,
7
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	the	subject-object	dichotomy.
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	suffering	sentient	beings,	right	here,
Who	are	driven	on	through	cyclic	existence	by	delusion	and	confusion	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	that	their	own	mind
Is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	free	from	extremes!
May	they	all	actualise	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	mistakenly	prejudiced	sentient	beings,	right
here,
Who	are	driven	on	through	cyclic	existence	by	attachment	and	craving	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	that	their	own	awareness
Is	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	imbued	with	supreme	bliss!
May	they	all	actualise	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource!
How	needing	of	compassion	are	sentient	beings	with	discordant	views,	right
here,
Who	 are	 driven	 on	 through	 cyclic	 existence	 by	 aversion	 and	 dualistic
perception	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	that	their	own	mind
Is	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation,	arising	and	subsiding	[naturally]!
May	they	all	actualise	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	all	unenlightened	living	beings,	right	here,
Who,	as	a	result	of	grasping,	are	obscured	by	dissonant	mental	states	and
[subtle	obstructions	to]	knowledge	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	[that	their	own	mind]
Is	indivisible	from	the	three	buddha-bodies!
May	they	all	actualise	the	three	buddha-bodies!
	
These	 verses	 forming	
A	 Prayer	 for	 Union	 with	 the	 Spiritual	 Teacher,
[Embodiment	 of]	 the	 Three	 Buddha-bodies,	 [entitled]	 Natural	 Liberation,

without	 Renunciation	 of	 the	 Three	 Poisons
,	 which	 are	 an	 extract	 from	 the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
,	were	composed	by
Padmākara,	the	preceptor	from	Oḍḍiyāna.
May	[the	influence	of]	this	sacred	teaching	not	be	extinguished	until	cyclic
existence	has	been	emptied!
8
This	prayer	was	brought	forth	from	Mount	Gampodar,	which	resembl