ith	 present	 events	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Gandhā.
	
ĀḤ	NṚTI	RĀGAYĀMI	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Nart
ῑ
].
19
Thus	 mental	 constructs	 associated	 with	 objects	 of	 taste	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Nart
ῑ.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Eight	Female	Bodhisattvas,
Mental	constructs	associated	with	the	eight	objects	of	consciousness	will	be
naturally	liberated,
While	[externally],	a	shower	of	flowers	and	sounds	of	music	will	manifest,	as
the	transfer	of	consciousness	occurs.
	
KRIṂ	PRAṂ	TRUṂ	KṢAṂ	SRUṂ	YE
	
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise

In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Six	Sages.
Thus	the	six	dissonant	mental	states	will	be	naturally	liberated,
The	womb	entrances	of	the	six	classes	of	beings	will	be	obstructed,
And	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	will	continuously	manifest	for	the	benefit
of	sentient	beings,
While	 [externally]	 manifold	 subtle	 relics	 will	 appear	 [following	 the
cremation].
	
OṂ	MUNI	KRIṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Devendra	Śakra.
Thus	pride,	the	entrance	to	the	god	realms,	will	be	obstructed.
OṂ	MUNI	PRAṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vemacitra.
Thus	envy,	the	entrance	to	the	antigod	realm,	will	be	obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	TRUṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Sākyamuni.
Thus	desire,	the	entrance	to	the	human	realm,	will	be	obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	KṢAṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Sthirasiṃha.
Thus	delusion,	the	entrance	to	the	animal	realm,	will	be	obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	SRUṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Jvālamukha.
Thus	 miserliness,	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 anguished-spirit	 realms,	 will	 be
obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	YE	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Dharmarāja.
Thus	hatred,	the	entrance	to	the	hell	realms,	will	be	obstructed.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Six	Emanational	Sages,
The	entrances	to	the	six	imperfect	classes	of	existence	will	be	obstructed,
And	the	[altruistic]	activities	of	the	pure	emanational	bodies	will	manifest,
While	[externally]	shimmering	rainbows	will	appear	amidst	the	clouds.
	
HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	JAḤ	HŪṂ	VAṂ	HOḤ
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	 the	 form	 of	 these	 [seed	 syllables	 of]	 the	 Eight	 Male	 and	 Female
Gatekeepers.
Thus,	the	entrances	to	the	four	types	of	birth	will	be	obstructed,

And	 the	 four	 immeasurable	 aspirations	 will	 grow	 within	 the	 mental
continuum,
While	[externally]	the	four	corresponding	rainbow	lights	[white,	yellow,	red
and	green]	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
	
OṂ	VAJRAKRODHA	VIJAYA	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vijaya.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	eternalism	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	all	acts	of	pacification	will	be	accomplished.
	
OṂ	VAJRAKRODHA	YAMĀNTAKA	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of
Yamāntaka.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	nihilism	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	all	acts	of	enrichment	will	be	accomplished.
	
OṂ	PADMĀNTAKṚT	HAYAGRĪVA	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of
Hayagr
ῑ
varāja.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	egoism	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	all	acts	of	subjugation	will	be	accomplished.
	
OṂ	VAJRAKRODHA	AMṚTAKUṆḌALI	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention
of	Amṛtakuṇḍalin.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	substantialism
20
	will	be	naturally
liberated,
And	all	acts	of	wrath	will	be	accomplished.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Four	Male	Gatekeepers,
The	 four	 extremes,	 including	 eternalism	 and	 nihilism,	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	the	four	enlightened	activities	will	be	accomplished,
While	[externally]	the	[four]	corresponding	rainbow	lights	-	white,	yellow,	red
and	green,	will	appear.
OṂ	VAJRĀṄKUŚĀ	JAḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Aṅkuśā.
Thus	the	entrance	to	miraculous	birth	will	be	obstructed,
And	immeasurable	compassion	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum.
	
OṂ	VAJRAPĀŚĀ	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Pāśā.

Thus	th