n	tears	flow	uncontrollably,
one	should	visualise	the	syllable	BHRŪṂ	on	the	subject’s	eyes.
17
	In	cases	when
the	left	cheek	sags	inwards,	one	should	visualise	the	syllable	KṢA	[on	the
cheek].
18
	In	cases	when	the	teeth	become	locked,	one	should	visualise	the
syllable	HŪṂ	[on	the	teeth].	If	a	black	spot	appears	on	the	tongue,	one	should
visualise	the	short	syllable	HŪṂ	[on	the	tongue].
19
	If	the	ears	lie	flat	[against
the	head],	one	should	visualise	the	syllable	MĀṂ	[on	the	ears].
20
	If	the	xiphoid
of	the	chest	is	sagging	inwards,	one	should	visualise	the	syllable	MŪṂ	[on	the
xiphoid].
21
	In	cases	when	the	pulse	of	the	carotid	arteries
22
	is	missing,	one
should	visualise	the	syllable	HŪṂ	[on	those	arteries].	These	visualised	syllables
should	be	recited	as	many	times	as	equals	the	subject’s	age	in	years;	and	they
should	also	be	drawn	[on	the	appropriate	point	of	the	body],	using	vermilion	and
scented	water.
[Ritual	Averting	of	the	Signs	of	Remote	Death]
Similarly,	 when	 an	 examination	 is	 made	 of	 one’s	 reflected	 image	 optically
projected	onto	the	sky:	if	the	symbolic	hand-held	implement	is	missing,	one
should	perform	one	hundred	and	eight	feast-offerings	on	behalf	of	one’s	spiritual
teacher.	If	the	right	hand	is	missing,	one	should	prepare	a	dough	effigy,	one	cubit
in	height,	using	seven	kinds	of	grain.	The	head	should	be	fashioned	to	resemble
an	open-jawed	lion,	and	a	number	of	gull	feathers	should	be	inserted	into	it,
equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.	The	effigy	should	then	be	carried	down	a
main	street	towards	a	royal	manor,	which	is	located	to	the	north.
In	cases	when	the	left	hand	is	missing,	one	should	place	the	fang	of	a	black-

striped	tiger	and	the	fang	of	a	black	dog	inside	a	weasel	skin.	On	top	of	that	one
should	place	a	dough	effigy,	kneaded	together	with	the	subject’s	own	urine,	and
then	ritually	expel	the	effigy	by	throwing	it	into	a	river.
In	cases	when	the	right	leg	is	missing	below	the	knee,	[death]	will	be	averted
if,	at	dusk	as	the	sun	is	setting,	one	offers	a	number	of	acacia	or	juniper	lamps,
equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.
In	cases	when	the	left	leg	is	missing,	one	should	make	an	effigy	of	white
earth,	one	cubit	in	height,	and	insert	into	its	heart	a	birchwood	stick,	four	finger-
widths	 in	 length,	 marked	 with	 notches,	 equalling	 the	 subject’s	 own	 age	 in
number.	It	should	be	carried	off	at	daybreak,	and	left	in	an	empty	quadrangle.
In	cases	when	the	right	part	of	the	head	is	missing,	one	should	compound
various	kinds	of	inauspicious	earth	with	the	fruits	of	black	wood	trees,	and	[out
of	this	mixture]	make	a	black	amulet,	into	which	the	subject’s	own	hair	and
clothing	fragments	should	be	inserted,	along	with	a	label	made	from	mountain
willow	wood,	[inscribed]	with	the	names	of	the	twelve	[animal]	year-signs.	Then
the	amulet	should	be	sealed,	and	a	number	of	thorns	of	different	species	should
be	attached	to	its	upper	face.	If	one	can	find	as	many	differing	types	of	thorn	as
equals	the	subject’s	age	in	years	it	would	be	best.	Otherwise,	if	one	cannot	find
[that	many],	one	should	insert	as	many	[differing	types]	as	one	can	find.	Then	at
midnight,	one	should	put	on	black	clothing	and	carry	the	amulet	to	a	cemetery.
In	cases	when	the	left	part	of	the	head	is	missing,	one	should	make	a	dough
effigy	using	twenty-five	different	types	of	grain,	and	insert	[fragments	of]	human
bones,	horse	bones	and	dog	bones	into	its	heart.	Then,	one	should	wrap	the
effigy	in	the	subject’s	old	clothing,	and	at	twilight	on	the	eleventh	day	[of	the
lunar	month],	one	should	give	it	to	another	person	for	insertion	into	a	pit	[which
has	been	made]	eighty	paces	to	the	south.	At	that	time,	one	should	cry	out,
proclaiming	one’s	sorrows	three	times,	and	bury	the	effigy.	Thereupon,	[death]
will	be	averted.
In	cases	when	the	head	is	missing	above	the	neck,	one	should	make	a	number
of	burnt	offerings	using	thorn	bushes,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years,	and
burn	 them	 in	 succession.	 While	 each	 of	 these