uistic	intention.	I	will
meditate	on	the	generation	of	loving	kindness,	compassion	and	an	altruistic
intention	to	attain	enlightenment.	For	the	benefit	of	all	sentient	beings,	who	are
as	limitless	as	space,	I	must	attain	perfect	buddhahood.’	And	in	particular,	[you
should	 think]:	 ‘At	 this	 moment,	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 all	 sentient	 beings,	 I	 must
recognise	[the	time	of]	death	as	[the	arising	of]	inner	radiance,	the	Buddha-
body	 of	 Reality,	 and	 while	 in	 that	 state,	 I	 must	 attain	 the	 supreme
accomplishment	of	the	Great	Seal,	and	thereby	act	for	the	good	of	all	sentient
beings.	 If	 I	 do	 not	 achieve	 this	 accomplishment,	 then,	 recognising	 the
intermediate	state	as	it	is,	I	will	actualise	the	coalescent	Buddha-body	of	the
Great	Seal	during	the	intermediate	state,	and	thereby,	manifesting	in	order	to
instruct	each	in	accordance	with	his	or	her	needs,	I	will	act	for	the	benefit	of	all
sentient	beings,	who	are	as	limitless	as	space.’	Without	giving	up	the	focus	on
cultivating	an	altruistic	intention,	in	the	above	way,	recollect	the	meditative
experiences	which	you	formerly	developed	on	the	basis	of	the	oral	teachings.
	
Those	words	should	be	clearly	spoken,	while	placing	the	lips	close	to	the	ear	[of
the	dying	person].	Without	permitting	the	attention	
[of	the	dying	one]	to	be
distracted	even	for	an	instant,	[the	attendant]	should	remind	him	or	her	of	past
meditative	experiences.
Then,	when	the	respiration	has	ceased,	and	the	two	carotid	arteries	have	been
firmly	pressed,	remind	[the	dying	person]	with	the	following	words,	if	the
individual	was	a	spiritual	teacher	or	a	spiritual	friend	greater	than	oneself:
	
Venerable	One!	The	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	is	now	arisen	before	you.
Recognise	it,	and	concentrate	directly	on	its	experiential	cultivation.
	

For	all	others,	one	should	introduce	[the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground],	with	the
following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
	(call	the	name	of	the	individual)	
listen!	Pure	inner
radiance,	reality	itself,	is	now	arising	before	you.	Recognise	it!	O,	Child	of
Buddha	Nature,	this	radiant	essence	that	is	now	your	conscious	awareness	is	a
brilliant	emptiness.	It	is	beyond	substance,	beyond	characteristics	and	beyond
colour,	completely	empty	of	inherent	existence	in	any	respect	whatsoever.	This	is
the	female	Buddha	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	essential	nature	of	reality.	The	essence	of
your	 own	 conscious	 awareness	 is	 emptiness.	 Yet,	 this	 is	 not	 a	 vacuous	 or
nihilistic	emptiness;	this,	your	very	own	conscious	awareness,	is	unimpededly
radiant,	brilliant	and	vibrant.	This	[conscious	awareness]	is	the	male	Buddha
Samantabhadra.	The	utterly	indivisible	presence	of	these	two:	the	essence	of
your	own	awareness,	which	is	empty,	without	inherent	existence	with	respect	to
any	substance	whatsoever,	and	your	own	conscious	awareness,	which	is	vibrant
and	radiantly	present,	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.	This	intrinsic	awareness,
manifest	 in	 a	 great	 mass	 of	 light,	 in	 which	 radiance	 and	 emptiness	 are
indivisible,	is	the	buddha	[nature]	of	unchanging	light,	beyond	birth	or	death.
Just	to	recognise	this	is	enough!	If	you	recognise	this	brilliant	essence	of	your
own	conscious	awareness	to	be	the	buddha	[nature],	then	to	gaze	into	intrinsic
awareness	is	to	abide	in	the	enlightened	intention	of	all	the	buddhas.
	
This	 introduction	 should	 be	 made	 three	 or	 seven	 times,	 with	 correct
pronunciation	and	clear	diction.	Accordingly,	[the	deceased]	will	firstly	recollect
[the	teachings]	as	they	had	been	formerly	given	by	
his	or	her	teacher,	and
secondly	be	introduced	to	inner	radiance	as	a	naked	natural	awareness.	And	then,
thirdly,	having	recognised	this,	he	or	she	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
beyond	conjunction	or	disjunction,	and	certainly	achieve	liberation.	Recognition
of	the	‘first	inner	radiance’	[of	the	ground]	takes	place	in	this	way.
	
[Introduction	to	the	Inner	Radiance	of	the	Path]
	
If,	however,	it	is	feared	that	[the	deceased]	has	not