ee	Avenue,	
Rosebank,	Johannesburg	2196,	South	Africa	
Penguin	Books	Ltd,	Registered	Offices:
80	Strand,	London	WC2R	0RL,	England	
First	published	in	Great	Britain	by	Penguin	Books	Ltd	2005	
First	published	in	the	United	States	of	America	by	Viking	Penguin,	
a	member	of	Penguin	Group	(USA)	Inc.	2006	
Published	in	Penguin	Books	(UK)	2006	
Published	in	Penguin	Books	(USA)	2007
	
Translation	copyright	©	The	Orient	Foundation	(UK)	and	Gyurme	Dorje,	2005	Editorial	apparatus
copyright	©	The	Orient	Foundation	(UK),	Graham	Coleman,	and	Thupten	Jinpa,	2005	Introductory
commentary	copyright	©	His	Holiness	The	Dalai	Lama,	2005

All	rights	reserved
	
Thangkas	painted	by	the	late	Shawu	Tsering	of	Repkong	and	photographed	by	Jill	Morley	Smith	are	from
the	private	collection	of	Gyurme	Dorje.
	
eISBN	:	978-1-10146228-7

CIP	data	available
	
	
	
The	scanning,	uploading	and	distribution	of	this	book	via	the	Internet	or	via	any	other	means	without	the
permission	of	the	publisher	is	illegal	and	punishable	by	law.	Please	purchase	only	authorized	electronic
editions,	and	do	not	participate	in	or	encourage	electronic	piracy	of	copyrighted	materials.	Your	support	of
the	author’s	rights	is	appreciated.
http://us.penguingroup.com

May	all	sentient	beings,	
children	of	buddha	nature,	
realise	
the	ultimate	nature	of	mind:	
insight	and	compassion,	
in	blissful	union.

Acknowledgements
Our	project	began	in	1988	when	HH	the	Dalai	Lama	kindly	offered	to	request
HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	Rinpoche,	the	late	head	of	the	Nyingma	school,	to	give	an
oral	commentary	to	me	on	key	sections	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
.	The
Dalai	 Lama	 knew	 that	 various	 translations	 had	 been	 made	 of	 ‘The	 Great
Liberation	by	Hearing’,	our	Chapter	11,	but	that	so	far	no	one	had	translated	the
entire	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
.	HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	graciously	agreed	to	the
Dalai	Lama’s	request	and	over	a	period	of	four	weeks	gave	the	empowerments
and	an	incisive	and	illuminating	oral	commentary	to	the	core	elements	of	the
text,	which	was	eloquently	translated	each	day	by	Sogyal	Rinpoche.
While	 in	 Kathmandu,	 receiving	 the	 oral	 commentary	 from	 HH	 Dilgo
Khyentse	Rinpoche,	I	had	the	good	fortune	to	meet	Dr	Gyurme	Dorje,	who	had
previously	translated	Longchen	Rabjampa’s	commentary	to	the	
Guhygarbha
Tantra
,	the	root	text	on	which	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	is	based.	During	our
first	meeting,	Gyurme	agreed	to	make	a	new	annotated	translation	of	the	entire
Tibetan	 Book	 of	 the	 Dead
,	 a	 task	 he	 undertook	 with	 exceptional	 care	 and
dedication	over	the	years	that	followed.	While	Gyurme	was	working	on	the
translation	he	was	also	employed	at	the	School	of	Oriental	and	African	Studies
in	London	as	a	research	fellow,	translating	into	English	the	
Greater	Tibetan-
Chinese	Dictionary
	
(
Bod-rgya	tshig-mdzod	chen-mo
).	During	this	time,	Gyurme
worked	closely	with	the	highly	regarded	Nyingma	master	Zenkar	Rinpoche,	who
is	one	of	the	foremost	contemporary	lineage	holders	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
.	Zenkar	Rinpoche	kindly	advised	Gyurme	throughout	the	translation	of	our
text	and	also	gave	an	extensive	oral	commentary	to	us	on	Chapter	4,	‘The
Introduction	to	Awareness’.
At	various	stages	of	the	project,	the	Dalai	Lama	answered	my	
questions	about
difficult	points,	and	he	also	dictated	to	me	the	lucid	and	succinct	Introductory
Commentary.	At	the	Dalai	Lama’s	request,	Khamtrul	Rinpoche,	an	adviser	to	the
Dalai	Lama	on	Nyingma	studies,	also	gave	a	beautiful	oral	commentary	to	key
sections	of	Chapter	8	and	dictated	the	introduction	to	Chapter	11.
Throughout	the	editing	process	I	had	the	happy	good	fortune	of	working	with
Geshe	Thupten	Jinpa,	senior	translator	to	the	Dalai	Lama,	whom	I	had	first	met
in	1977	and	who	has	been	a	close	friend	since	he	came	to	England	to	study
philosophy	at	Cambridge	in	1989.	Jinpa	translated	the	Dalai	Lama’s	Introductory

Commentary	and	reviewed	every	line	and	word	of	all	fourteen	chapters	of	the
edited	translation	with	me	twice,	in	the	course	of