in	you
15
	
will	now	gather	together	all	your	virtuous	actions,	counting	them
out	with	white	pebbles,	and	the	‘innate	bad	conscience’	within	you	will	gather
together	all	your	non-virtuous	actions,	counting	them	out	with	black	pebbles.	At
this	moment	you	will	tremble	with	extreme	fear,	awe	and	terror.	You	will	tell	lies,
saying,	‘I	have	not	committed	non-virtuous	
actions!’	But	at	this,	Yama	will	say:
‘I	shall	consult	the	mirror	of	past	actions.’
16
	
In	the	mirror	of	past	actions,	[all
your	 virtues	 and	 non-virtues]	 will	 be	 reflected	 vividly	 and	 precisely.	 Your
attempts	at	deceit	will	be	of	no	use.	Tying	a	rope	around	your	neck,	Yama	will
drag	you	forward.	He	will	sever	[your	head]	at	the	neck,	extract	your	heart,	pull
out	your	entrails,	lick	your	brains,	drink	your	blood,	eat	your	flesh	and	suck
your	bones.	Despite	this,	you	will	not	die.	Even	as	your	body	is	[repeatedly]	cut
into	pieces,	it	will	be	continuously	revived.	Experiencing	being	cut	into	pieces	in
this	way,	time	after	time,	will	cause	enormous	suffering.	From	the	moment	the
counting	of	the	pebbles	begins,	do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	Do	not	lie,
and	do	not	be	afraid	of	Yama.	The	body	which	you	now	have	is	a	mental	body;
therefore,	even	though	you	experience	being	slain	and	cut	into	pieces,	you
cannot	die.	[Recognise	now,	that]	in	reality,	you	need	have	no	fear,	because,	[in
truth],	your	[body]	is	a	natural	form	of	emptiness.	The	acolytes	of	Yama	are
also,	[in	reality],	natural	forms	of	emptiness	-	these	are	your	own	bewildered
perceptions.	Your	body,	formed	of	mental	propensities,	is	[a	natural	form	of]
emptiness.	 Emptiness	 cannot	 harm	 emptiness.	 Signlessness	 cannot	 harm
signlessness.	 Outside,	 and	 distinct	 from	 your	 own	 bewildering	 perceptions,
Yama,	 gods,	 malevolent	 forces,	 the	 bull-headed	 Rakṣa	 and	 so	 on,	 do	 not

substantially	 exist.
17
	
Recognise	 this!	 Recognise,	 now,	 that	 this	 is	 the
intermediate	state!	Place	your	mind	in	the	meditative	stability	of	the	Great	Seal!
If	you	do	not	know	how	to	meditate,	directly	examine	the	essence	of	that	which	is
producing	your	fear	and	terror.	This	[essence]	is	a	stark	emptiness,	completely
with	out	inherent	existence	in	any	respect	whatsoever!	This	[stark	emptiness]	is
the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.	Yet,	this	emptiness	is	not	a	vacuous	or	nihilistic
emptiness.	The	essential	nature	of	this	emptiness	is	an	awesome,	direct	and
radiant	awareness,	which	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	[the	Buddha-body	of]
Perfect	Resource.	Indeed,	emptiness	and	radiance	are	not	separate:	the	essential
nature	of	emptiness	is	radiance	and	the	essential	nature	of	radiance	is	emptiness.
This	indivisible,	naked,	unclouded	and	exposed	awareness,	present	as	it	is	right
now	 in	 a	 natural	 uncontrived	 state,	 is	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Essentiality.
18
Furthermore,	the	natural	expressive	power	[of	this	Buddha-body	of	Essentiality]
is	 the	 compassionate	 Buddha-body	 of	 Emanation,	 which	 arises	 everywhere
without	obstruction.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	[to	me]	now,	and	do	not	be	
distracted.	By
merely	recognising	[the	essential	nature	of	your	experience]	in	the	above	way,
you	will	attain	perfect	buddhahood,	endowed	with	these	four	buddha-bodies.	Do
not	 be	 distracted!	 The	 division	 between	 buddhas	 and	 sentient	 beings	 is
determined	by	this	[recognition].	If	you	are	distracted	at	this	critical	moment,
the	opportunity	to	escape	from	the	swamp	of	suffering	will	be	lost.	It	is	said	of
this	very	moment:
	
In	an	instant,	penetrating	analysis	is	made.
In	an	instant,	perfect	buddhahood	is	attained.
	
Until	yesterday,	because	you	were	distracted,	even	though	so	many	aspects	of	the
intermediate	states	have	arisen,	you	did	not	attain	recognition.	[Up	to	this	time],
you	have	experienced	so	much	fear	and	terror.	Now,	if	you	continue	to	be
distracted,	the	lifeline	of	compassion,	suspended	to	you,	will	be	cut	off	and	you
will	move	on	to	a	place	where	there	is	no	[immediate]	prospect	of	liberation.	So
be