e	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	
the	greenish	red	vulture-
headed	Bhakṣas
ῑ
,	holding	a	club;	the	red	horse-headed	Rat
ῑ
,	holding	a	large
torso;	 the	 pale	 red	 garuḍaheaded	 mighty	 one	 [Rudhiramad
ῑ
,	 consort	 of
Mahābala],	holding	a	cudgel;	the	red	dog-headed	[Ekacāriṇ
ῑ
]	Rākṣas
ῑ
,	wielding
a	vajra-razor	in	her	hand;	the	red	hoopoe-headed	Manohārikā,	firing	an	arrow
from	a	bow;	and	the	greenish	red	deer-headed	protectress	of	wealth,	[Siddhikar
ῑ
,
consort	of	Vasurakṣita],	holding	a	vase	in	her	hand.
10
	
Do	not	be	afraid!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	from	the	north,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	of	the	north	will
emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	the	bluish	green	snake-
headed	Vāyudev
ῑ
,	brandishing	an	ensign;	the	reddish	green	ibex-headed	Agnāy
ῑ
,
holding	a	glowing	fire-brand;	the	blackish	green	sow-headed	Varāh
ῑ
,	holding	a
noose	of	fangs;	the	reddish	green	crow-headed	Vajrā	[Cāmuṇḍ
ῑ
],	holding	an
infant	human	corpse;	the	blackish	green	elephant-headed	Bhujanā,	holding	a
club	and	drinking	blood	[from	a	skull];	and	the	bluish	green	snake-headed
Varuṇān
ῑ
,	holding	a	noose	of	snakes	in	her	hand.
11
	
Do	not	be	afraid!
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 the	 four	 yogin
ῑ
	 who	 are	 the	 [four]	 female
gatekeepers	will	emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	from	the
east,	the	white	cuckoo-headed	Vajrā	[Mahākāl
ῑ
],	holding	an	iron	hook;	from	the
south,	the	yellow	goat-headed	Vajrā	[Mahāchāgalā],	holding	a	noose;	from	the
west,	the	red	lion-headed	Vajrā	[Mahākumbhakarṇ
ῑ
],	holding	an	iron	chain;	and
from	the	north,	the	black-green	snake-headed	Vajrā	[Lambodarā],	holding	a	bell
in	her	hand.	These	four	yogin
ῑ
,	the	female	gatekeepers,	will	indeed	emerge	from
within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	Do	not	be	afraid!
Since	these	twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
	emanate	naturally	from	the	expressive	power
of	the	naturally	arising	deities,	which	are	the	wrathful	Herukas	-	recognise	them
now!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	through	the	expressive	power	of	emptiness,	the
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality	 has	 arisen	 as	 the	 peaceful	 deities,	 recognise	 this!
Through	the	expressive	power	of	radiance,	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
has	arisen	as	the	wrathful	deities.
12
	
Recognise	this!
At	 this	 time,	 when	 the	 assembly	 of	 the	 fifty-eight	 blood-drinking	 deities
manifests	from	within	your	brain,	you	should	recognise	all	that	arises	as	the
naturally	 arising	 luminosity	 of	 your	 own	 awareness.	
Then,	 [if	 recognition
occurs],	you	will	immediately	attain	buddhahood,	inseparable	from	the	blood-

drinking	deities.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	even	now	you	do	not	recognise	this	[reality],
and	become	afraid	and	turn	away	from	the	[visionary	appearances],	you	will	go
on	to	experience	yet	further	suffering.	If	recognition	does	not	occur,	all	the
blood-drinking	deities	will	be	perceived	as	Yama.	You	will	be	overwhelmed	by
fear,	by	awe	and	by	terror	at	[the	sight	of]	all	the	blood-drinking	deities;	and
you	will	faint.	Those	[visionary	appearances],	which	are	natural	manifestations
[of	actual	reality],	will	[seem	to]	have	become	demons,	and	you	will	continue	to
roam	in	cyclic	existence.	But	[even	now],	if	you	are	not	awed	and	not	terrified,
you	will	avoid	the	continued	wandering	within	cyclic	existence.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	the	largest	of	the	buddha-bodies	of	the	Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities	will	be	as	vast	as	the	sky;	the	medium	ones	will	be	the	size
of	Mount	Sumeru;	and	even	the	smallest	will	be	the	size	of	eighteen	of	our
bodies,	standing	one	above	the	other.
13
	
Do	not	be	afraid!	All	phenomenal
existence	is	now	arising	as	luminosities	and	buddha-bodies.	By	recognising	all
the	present	visionary	appearances	to	be	the	natural	luminosity	of	your	own
intrinsic	awareness,	manifesting	as	lights	and	buddha-bodies,	you	will	dissolve
inseparably	 within	 the	 lights	 and	 buddha-bodies,	 and	 buddhahood	 will	 be
attained.	 O	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 whatever	 fearsome	 and	 terrifying
apparitions