sion,	is	now	to	be	revealed	to	you.	There	are	four	modes	of	birth:	birth
from	an	egg,	birth	from	a	womb,	supernormal	birth,	and	birth	from	warmth	and
moisture.
28
	
Among	these,	the	birth	from	an	egg	and	birth	from	a	womb	are	very
similar,	in	that	in	both	cases	you	will	see	the	male	and	the	female	engaged	in
sexual	union,	as	[described]	above.	If,	based	on	either	attachment	or	aversion,
you	enter	a	womb	at	this	time,	you	will	be	born	as	a	horse,	bird,	dog,	human,	or
whatever	is	appropriate.	If	you	are	to	be	born	as	a	male,	you	will	experience	
the
perceptions	of	a	male.	You	will	feel	intense	aversion	towards	the	father	and	you
will	feel	jealousy	and	attachment	towards	the	mother.	If	you	are	to	be	born	as	a
female,	you	will	experience	the	perceptions	of	a	female.	You	will	feel	intense
envy	and	jealousy	towards	the	mother	and	you	will	feel	intense	attachment	and
affection	towards	the	father.	This	[emotional	arousal]	will	cause	you	to	enter	a
womb.	Here	you	will	experience	the	‘coemergent	delight’,	in	the	midst	of	the
meeting	between	the	sperm	and	the	ovum.	From	that	state	of	bliss	you	will	faint
into	unconsciousness,	and	as	time	passes,	the	embryo	will	come	to	maturity	in
the	womb,	moving	through	[its	various	stages	of	development],	that	is,	the
clotting	of	the	embryo,	the	oval	elongation	of	the	embryo,
29
	
and	so	forth	until
finally,	you	will	emerge	[from	the	womb]	and	open	your	eyes.	Now,	you	will	have

turned	into	a	puppy.	Previously	having	been	a	human	being,	you	will	now	have
become	a	dog.	So	consequently,	you	will	suffer	in	a	dog-kennel,	or	similarly,	in	a
pigsty,	or	an	anthill,	or	a	wormhole,	or	else	you	may	be	born	as	a	baby	bull,	a
goat,	a	sheep	and	so	forth.	There	is	no	way	back.	You	will	experience	all	manner
of	sufferings	in	a	state	of	great	obscurity	and	delusion.	Through	this	process	you
will	continue	to	remain	within	the	six	classes	of	living	beings,	including	the
realms	of	the	hell	beings	and	the	anguished	spirits.	You	will	be	completely
drained	by	boundless	sufferings.	There	is	nothing	more	awesome	or	frightening
than	this!	Oh	dear!	This	is	truly	terrifying!	Oh	dear,	Oh	dear,	in	this	way,	those
who	lack	the	oral	instruction	of	a	genuine	spiritual	teacher	will	indeed	fall	into
the	great	abyss	of	cyclic	existence	and	be	tortured	unbearably	by	continuous
sufferings.	Rather	than	this,	listen	to	my	words!	Understand	this	instruction	of
mine.	I	will	reveal	now	an	oral	instruction	which	obstructs	the	womb	entrances,
through	the	reversal	of	attachment	and	the	reversal	of	aversion.	Listen	and
understand	this	well!	It	is	said	[in	the
	Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate
States
]:
30
	
I	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances	and	call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal.
This	is	the	time	when	perseverance	and	purity	of	perception	are	imperative.
I	must	give	up	all	jealousy	and	meditate	on	my	spiritual	teacher	with	consort.
	
As	is	described	[in	the	oral	instruction]	above,	if	you	are	to	be	born	as	a	male,
you	will	feel	attachment	towards	the	mother	and	aversion	towards	the	father.	If
you	are	to	be	born	as	a	female,	you	will	feel	attachment	to	the	father	and
aversion	towards	the	mother.	Thus	you	will	come	to	experience	jealousy,	[a
conflict	of	attachment	and	aversion].	Specific	to	this	stage,	there	is	a	profound
oral	instruction.	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	when	the	feelings	of	attachment	and
aversion	arise,	meditate	as	follows:	‘Alas,	sentient	beings	such	as	I,	with	such
negative	past	actions,	have,	up	until	now,	roamed	in	cyclic	existence.	I	have
continued	to	wander	in	this	way,	being	driven	on	by	my	feelings	of	attachment
and	 aversion.	 If,	 especially	 at	 this	 time,	 I	 continue	 to	 be	 influenced	 by
attachment	and	aversion,	there	is	a	danger	that	I	will	roam	into	the	limitlessly
[diverse]	states	of	cyclic	existence	and	risk	sinking	into	the	ocean	of	suffering,
for	 a	 very	 long	 time.	 Therefore,	 now,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 I	 must	 not
generate	attachment	or	aversion.	Oh	dear,	Oh	dear!	As	of	now,	I	shall	never
aga