those	below?	Did	you
scatter	barley	dough	and	grain	at	anthills?	What	other	subtle	acts	of	virtue	did
you	accumulate,	over	and	above	these?	Also,	did	you	study,	reflect	and	meditate
[on	the	Buddhist	teachings],	and	did	you	keep	your	one-day	vows	and	fasts?	Did
you	receive	meditative	instruction,	empowerments	and	guidance?	What	other
virtues	of	this	type	have	you	accumulated?	Tell	me	quickly	now!	Negative	past
actions	related	to	the	body	are	killing,	of	which	the	greatest	offence	is	the	killing
of	one’s	parents	and	the	smallest	is	the	killing	of	lice	and	nits,	stealing,	improper
sexual	 conduct	 and	 so	 forth.	 So	 what	 negative	 actions	 of	 body	 have	 you
accumulated?

Then	the	negative	actions	related	to	speech	are:	meaningless	gossip,	harsh
words,	slander,	lies	and	so	forth.	So	what	negative	actions	of	speech	have	you
accumulated?
The	 negative	 actions	 related	 to	 mind	 are:	 covetousness,	 harmful	 intent,
distorted	views,	and	so	on.	So	what	negative	actions	have	you	accumulated
mentally?
Also,	with	regard	to	the	five	inexpiable	crimes	and	the	five	approximate
[crimes],	 what	 negative	 or	 non-virtuous	 actions	 have	 you	 accumulated,
motivated	through	body,	speech,	or	mind?	Tell	me	now	in	clear	detail!
THE	HOUSEHOLDER	ŚRĪJĀTA	(
in	a	terrified	and	trembling	voice
):	May	I
speak	in	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja!	I	am	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	a	citizen	of
the	city	of	Kāmarūpa	in	the	north-east	of	India.	I	also	have	female	dependants.	I
was	a	humble	person,	self-sufficient	in	food	and	drink.	I	was	a	faithful	devotee
who	made	fulsome	offerings	to	all	the	fine	spiritual	teachers	who	came	to	my
district.	I	encouraged	others	to	engage	in	virtuous	actions.	Motivated	by	virtue
and	good	intent,	I	have	restored	ruined	
temples,	saved	many	living	creatures
from	 certain	 death,	 and	 repeatedly	 received	 profound	 empowerments	 and
guidance.	When	I	travelled	around,	I	cleared	dangerous	paths;	when	I	stayed	[at
home]	I	recited	the	Six-syllable	Mantra,	and	I	kept	my	one-day	vows	and	fasts.	I
am	a	householder	who	made	offerings	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels	above,	and
gave	charity	to	those	of	unfortunate	birth	below.	I	am	indeed	a	bodhisattva.	This
is	why	everyone	calls	me	the	householder	Lakṣmin	(‘endowed	with	wealth’).
Such	is	the	unbroken	sequence	of	my	virtuous	actions.
As	for	my	negative	past	actions,	although	I	had	the	intention	not	to	harm	even
a	single	living	being,	since	I	was	submerged	in	the	perverse	world	which	is
cyclic	existence,	and	I	had	a	son,	and	in	order	for	him	to	be	able	to	join	in
matrimony,	I	took	the	lives	of	ten	animals	[for	the	wedding	feast].	I	confessed
the	negativity	of	this	action,	and	recited	the	
Diamond	Cutter
27
	one	hundred
times.
Then,	when	I	and	my	neighbours	took	the	lives	of	many	living	creatures	in
order	to	pay	taxes	in	support	of	the	village	community,	I	too	felt	much	remorse
and	made	confession.	Also,	since	I	had	lived	as	a	worldly	householder,	I	thought
that	I	must	have	unintentionally	killed	[many	insects]	underfoot	and	by	my
hands,	for	which	reason	I	often	felt	remorse.
Since	the	credentials	of	my	virtuous	and	negative	actions	are	established	in
these	 ways,	 I	 beg	 you	 to	 consider	 this	 conduct	 and	 favour	 me	 with	 your
compassion.

DHARMARĀJA:	Well	then,	if	it	is	true	what	you	have	said,	then	you	have
thought	well	about	virtuous	and	negative	actions,	and	about	cause	and	effect;	but
I	shall	consult	the	mirror	of	past	actions	because	you	human	beings	are	clever
liars!	(
He	shows	him	the	mirror
.)	Look,	fortunate	Child	of	Buddha	Nature!	This
mirror	of	past	actions	in	which	phenomenal	existence	is	clearly	reflected	is
clearer	 than	 the	 omniscient	 eye	 that	 perceives	 the	 three	 times.	 When	 it
manifestly	reveals	the	natural	expression	of	virtuous	and	negative	past	actions,
whatever	you	have	done	in	the	human	world,	all	the	virtuous	and	negative
actions	 you	 have	 committed	 in	 the	 human	 world,	 will	 visibly	 appear,
immediately.	So	what	lies	and	deceit	have	you	spoken?