upport	me
from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
[OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ]
5
May	the	elements	of	space	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	blue	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	water	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	white	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	earth	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	yellow	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	fire	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	red	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	wind	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	green	buddha.
May	the	[awesome]	sounds,	lights	and	rays	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	infinite	fields	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
May	the	rainbow-coloured	elements	not	rise	up	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	fields	of	the	manifold	buddhas.
	
May	I	recognise	all	sounds	as	my	own	sounds.
May	I	recognise	all	lights	as	my	own	lights.

May	I	recognise	all	rays	as	my	own	rays.
May	I	spontaneously	recognise	[the	characteristics	of]	the	intermediate	states.
May	the	fields	of	the	three	buddha-bodies	be	manifest.
	
SAMAYA!
	
	
Herein	is	contained	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the
Intermediate	States
.
6
	
When	my	life’s	course	is	ended,
And	I	roam	alone	in	the	intermediate	states,
The	loved	ones	of	this	world	can	no	longer	help	me.
So,	[at	this	critical	time],	may	the	Conquerors,	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities,
[Quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	may	the	deep	darkness	of	my	ignorance	be	dispelled.
	
When	I	roam	alone,	separated	from	my	loved	ones,
And	[myriad]	images	of	emptiness	arise,	naturally	manifesting,
May	the	buddhas	[quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	 may	 the	 fear	 of	 the	 awesome	 and	 terrifying	 intermediate	 states	 be
annulled.
	
When	the	five	radiant	lights	of	pristine	cognition	dawn,
May	I	recognise	them	as	my	own	[nature],	without	awe	and	without	terror,
And	as	the	[manifold]	forms	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arise,
May	 I	 be	 fearlessly	 confident	 and	 recognise	 [the	 characteristics	 of]	 the
intermediate	states.
	
When	I	experience	suffering,	as	the	result	of	negative	past	actions,
May	the	Great	Compassionate	One	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	the	natural	sound	of	reality	reverberates	like	a	thousand	peals	of
thunder,
May	all	sounds	be	heard	as	the	teachings	of	the	Greater	Vehicle.
	

When	I	am	driven	on	by	past	actions,	unable	to	find	a	refuge,
May	the	meditational	deities	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	I	experience	the	suffering	of	habitual	tendencies	and	past	actions,
May	the	meditative	stabilities	of	inner	radiance	and	bliss	[naturally]	arise.
7
	
When	I	am	miraculously	born	into	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth,
May	I	not	be	beguiled	by	the	perverse	prophecies	of	Māra,
8
And	as	I	[freely]	arrive	at	every	place	that	I	think	of,
May	the	bewildering	fear	and	terror,	generated	by	my	negative	past	actions,
not	arise.
	
When	the	roars	of	savage	wild	beasts	echo	around	me,
May	their	cries	be	transformed	into	the	sound	of	the	sacred	teachings,	the	Six
Syllables,
And	as	I	am	engulfed	by	snow,	rain,	wind	and	darkness,
May	I	achieve	the	pure	clairvoyance	of	radiant	pristine	cognition.
	
May	sentient	beings	in	the	intermediate	state,	similar	in	kind	to	myself,
Be	born	into	the	higher	realms,	free	from	rivalry,
And	as	severe	dissonant	mental	states	generate	insatiable	hunger	and	thirst,
May	the	afflictions	of	hunger,	thirst,	heat	and	cold,	be	annulled.
	
When	I	see	my	future	parents	in	union,
May	I	perceive	them	as	Mahākāruṇika	and	consort,
And	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 others,	 being	 blessed	 with	 the	 power	 to	 choose	 a
birthplace,
May	I	achieve	an	exalted	body,	adorned	with	the	auspicious	major	and	minor
marks.
Once	I	have	achieved	birth	in	a	supreme	human	form,
May	I	act	so	as	to	swiftly	liberate	all	who	see	and	hear	me