adiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	mid-point	between	my	eyebrows,
The	vase	empowerment	is	thus	received	and	the	obscurations	of	the	body	are
purified.
Please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-body!
	
From	the	throat	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,
A	red	syllable	ĀḤ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	sense	faculty	of	my	tongue,
The	secret	empowerment	is	thus	received	and	the	obscurations	of	speech	are
purified.
Please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-speech!
	
From	the	heart	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,

A	blue	syllable	HŪṂ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	centre	of	my	heart,
The	empowerment	of	pristine	cognition	is	thus	received,	and	the	obscurations
of	mind	are	purified.
Please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-mind!
	
From	the	navel	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,
A	red	syllable	HRĪḤ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	centre	of	my	navel,
The	obscurations	which	[mundanely]	differentiate	between	body,	speech	and
mind	are	purified,
And	the	fourth	empowerment	of	indivisible	coemergence	is	received.
	
O	glorious	and	precious	root	spiritual	teacher!
Be	indivisibly	present,	[seated]	on	the	pistil	of	a	lotus	within	my	heart	for
ever!
Through	your	great	kindness,	favour	me	with	your	acceptance,
And	please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-body,	speech
and	mind!
	
May	we	become	exactly	like	you,	glorious	spiritual	teacher!
Exactly	resembling	you	in	body,	retinue,	lifespan,	fields,
And	in	your	supreme	and	excellent	major	marks.
	
These	verses	forming	the	preliminary	practice	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	
Liberation	 through
[Recognition	 of]	 Enlightened	 Intention
	 may	 be	 applied	 as	 a	 supplementary
method	in	the	context	of	mental	purification.
This	spiritual	practice	of	the	unsurpassed	Greater	Vehicle	(Mahāyāna)	is	an
oral	teaching	of	[Nyinda]	Choje	Lingpa,	the	eldest	son	of	the	treasure-finder
Karma	Lingpa;	and	it	was	committed	to	writing	by	Guru	Sūryacandraraśmi	[i.e.
Nyinda	Ozer].

2
A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation,	without	Renunciation	of	the	Three	Poisons
CONTEXT
This	prayer	to	the	spiritual	teacher	is	generally	recited	immediately	after
the	
Preliminary	Practice
.	It	is	also	recommended	that	it	be	recited	at	the
beginning	of	any	ritual,	or	when	thinking	of	the	spiritual	teacher	or
whenever	the	practitioner	is	about	to	enter	into	periods	of	meditation.
A	correct	perception	of	the	spiritual	teacher	is	considered	vital	for	all
practitioners	of	the	Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality	(
Vajrayāna
).	Further,
it	is	considered	essential	that	a	practitioner	receive	spiritual	inspiration,
as	transmitted	through	an	unbroken	lineage	of	masters,	from	a	living
teacher.	First,	however,	before	accepting	anyone	as	a	spiritual	teacher,	it
is	also	regarded	as	essential	that	the	practitioner	examine	and	scrutinise
the	prospective	teacher	over	a	long	period	of	time	and	accept	him	or	her
as	a	qualified	teacher	only	when	it	is	certain	that	the	person	meets	the
requirements	of	a	spiritual	teacher	as	set	out	in	the	authoritative	sacred
texts.	Then,	if	they	are	sure	that	their	own	motivation	is	sincere,	students
should	 follow	 the	 advice	 of	 their	 chosen	 spiritual	 teacher	 with
incontrovertible	devotion.
Ultimately,	the	inspiration	that	is	requested	from	the	spiritual	teacher	is
coming	from	the	purity	of	the	practitioner’s	own	perception,	altruistic
intention	and	confidence.
Herein	is	contained	
A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher,	[Embodiment
of]	 the	 Three	 Buddha-bodies,	 [entitled]	 Natural	 Liberation,	 without
Renunciation	of	the	Three	Poisons
,
1
	[which	is	an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	

In	the	palace	of	reality’s	expanse,	pure	and	pervasive,
Is	my	s