ations
The	colour	illustrations	that	appear	in	our	text	have	never	previously	been
published.	The	two	painted	scrolls	depicting	the	Hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities	in	Repkong	style,	which	were	commissioned	by	Gyurme	Dorje	in	2002,
are	from	the	studio	of	the	late	master	artist	Shawu	Tsering	of	Sengeshong
Yagotsang	in	Amdo.
The	line	drawings	of	Guru	Padmasambhava	(p.	iv)	and	Karma	Lingpa	(p.	xlvi)
are	the	work	of	Robert	Beer.	The	circular	chart	of	mantras	(
btags-grol
)	(p.	346)
is	reproduced	from	Fremantle	and	Trungpa,	
The	Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
(Shambhala	Classics,	2000),	p.	32.

Introductory	Commentary
by	His	Holiness	the	XIVth	Dalai	Lama
	
	
	
The	question	of	whether	or	not	there	exists	a	continuity	of	consciousness	after
death	has	been	an	important	aspect	of	philosophical	reflection	and	debate	from
ancient	Indian	times	to	the	present.	When	considering	these	matters	from	a
Buddhist	point	of	view,	however,	we	have	to	bear	in	mind	that	the	understanding
of	the	nature	of	continuity	of	consciousness	and	the	understanding	of	the	nature
of	the	‘I’	or	‘self’	are	closely	interlinked.	Therefore,	let	us	first	look	at	what	it	is
that	can	be	said	to	constitute	a	person.
According	to	Buddhist	classical	literature,	a	person	can	be	seen	as	possessing
five	 interrelated	 aggregates,	 technically	 known	 as	 the	 five	 psycho-physical
aggregates.
a
	These	are	the	aggregate	of	consciousness,	the	aggregate	of	form
(which	includes	our	physical	body	and	senses),	the	aggregate	of	feeling,	the
aggregate	of	discrimination,	and	the	aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies.	That
is	to	say,	there	is	our	body,	the	physical	world	and	our	five	senses,	and	there	are
the	 various	 processes	 of	 mental	 activity,	 our	 motivational	 tendencies,	 our
labelling	of	and	discrimination	between	objects,	our	feelings,	and	the	underlying
awareness	or	consciousness.
Among	 the	 ancient	 schools	 of	 thought,	 which	 accepted	 the	 notion	 of
continuity	 of	 consciousness,	 there	 were	 several	 non-Buddhist	 philosophical
schools	 which	 regarded	 the	 entity,	 the	 ‘I’	 or	 ‘self’,	 which	 migrated	 from
existence	to	existence	as	being	unitary	and	permanent.	They	also	suggested	that
this	‘self’	was	autonomous	in	its	relationship	to	the	psycho-physical	components
that	constitute	a	person.	In	other	words	they	believed	or	posited	that	there	is	an
essence	or	‘soul’	of	the	person,	which	exists	independently	from	the	body	and
the	mind	of	the	person.
However,	 Buddhist	 philosophy	 does	 not	 accept	 the	 existence	 of	 such	 an
independent,	autonomous	entity.	In	the	Buddhist	view,	the	self	or	the	person	is
understood	in	terms	of	a	dynamic	interdependent	relationship	of	both	mental	and
physical	 attributes,	 that	 is	 to	 say	 the	 psycho-physical	 components	 which

constitute	a	person.	In	other	words	our	sense	of	self	can,	upon	examination,	be
seen	as	a	complex	flow	of	mental	and	physical	events,	clustered	in	clearly
identifiable	patterns,	including	our	physical	features,	instincts,	emotions,	and
attitudes,	 etc.,	 continuing	 through	 time.	 Further,	 according	 to	 Prāsaṅgika-
Madhyamaka	philosophy,	which	has	become	the	prevailing	philosophical	view
of	Tibetan	Buddhism	today,	this	sense	of	self	is	simply	a	mental	construct,	a
mere	label	given	to	this	cluster	of	dependently	arising	mental	and	physical
events	in	dependence	on	their	continuity.
Now,	 when	 we	 look	 at	 this	 interdependence	 of	 mental	 and	 physical
constituents	 from	 the	 perspective	 of	 Highest	 Yoga	 Tantra,
b
	
there	 are	 two
concepts	of	a	person.	One	is	the	temporary	person	or	self,	that	is	as	we	exist	at
the	moment,	and	this	is	labelled	on	the	basis	of	our	coarse	or	gross	physical	body
and	conditioned	mind,	and,	at	the	same	time,	there	is	a	subtle	person	or	self
which	is	designated	in	dependence	on	the	subtle	body	and	subtle	mind.	This
subtle	body	and	subtle	mind	are	seen	as	a	single	entity	that	has	two	facets.	The
aspect	which	has	the	quality	of	awareness,	which	can	reflect	and	has	the