is	being
given,	or	when	specific	guidance	on	consciousness	transference	is	being	given,
whichever	is	appropriate.	
8

As	found	in	the	preliminary	practices	of	the	[general]	guidance,
9
	
one	should
reflect	upon	the	difficulty	of	obtaining	[a	human	form	endowed	with]	freedoms
and	 opportunities	 [conducive	 to	 practice],	 and	 [one	 should	 reflect	 on]	 the
sufferings	of	cyclic	existence,	and	develop	an	attitude	which	is	disillusioned	with
cyclic	existence	and	desirous	of	renunciation.	Furthermore,	even	though	one	has
obtained	[the	above	freedoms	and	opportunities],	which	are	difficult	to	obtain,
one	should	[always],	from	the	depths	of	one’s	heart,	remember	death,	which	is
never	far	away.
Then,	sitting	on	a	comfortable	seat	in	the	posture	of	the	bodhisattvas,	one
should,	in	the	following	manner,	close	the	orifices	[of	the	body	which	lead	to
rebirth]	within	cyclic	existence:
The	body	should	be	upright	and	erect.	The	hands	should	cover	the	knees,
forming	 the	 earth-touching	 gesture,
10
	 and	 the	 shoulders	 should	 be	 drawn
upwards.	Then,	in	one’s	own	heart	one	should	visualise	an	azure	blue	syllable
HŪṂ,	blazing	with	light,	from	which	a	single	syllable	HŪṂ	breaks	away	and
descends	to	the	rectum,	precisely	blocking	the	orifice	through	which	the	hells	are
entered.	Another	syllable	HŪṂ	breaks	away	and	descends	to	the	orifice	of
procreation,	thereby	blocking	the	entrance	to	[the	realm	of]	the	anguished	spirits.
Similarly,	another	syllable	HŪṂ	[breaks	away	and]	blocks	the	entrance	[to	the
world	of]	animals,	which	is	in	the	urethra,	while	yet	another	syllable	HŪṂ
moves	to	the	navel,	and	others	to	the	mouth,	the	nostrils,	the	eyes,	and	the	ears,
each	one	precisely	blocking	its	respective	orifice.
11
Then,	on	the	crown	of	the	head,	one	should	visualise	that	the	crown	fontanelle
is	blocked	by	a	downward-facing	white	syllable	HAṂ.
12
	[Further,	one	should
visualise]	the	central	channel,	in	the	middle	of	the	body,	straight	and	erect,	with	a
yellowish	white	lustre,	like	a	taut	air-filled	sheep’s	intestine,	with	its	lower
extremity	extending	below	the	navel,	and	its	upper	extremity	extending	to	the
crown	fontanelle.	At	the	lower	extremity	below	the	navel,	at	a	focal	point	where
the	three	[main]	channels	converge,
13
	one	should	visualise	a	brilliant	white
seminal	point,	which	is	the	essence	of	awareness,	radiant	and	clear,	breathing
rhythmically,	continuously	pulsating,	and	on	the	verge	of	ascending.
In	the	space	above	the	crown	of	the	head,	one	should	visualise	one’s	spiritual
teacher,	seated,	full	of	joy,	in	the	form	of	Vajradhara.	Then,	one’s	bodily	weight
should	 be	 [drawn	 in	 and]	 concentrated	 upwards,	 and	 the	 rectum	 forcefully
closed.	The	eyes	should	be	turned	upwards,	the	tongue	[lifted	to]	rest	along	the

upper	palate,	and	the	hands	firmly	placed	in	the	‘fist’	gesture,
14
	with	the	thumbs
pressing	down	on	the	bases	of	the	fourth	fingers.
[Then],	from	below	the	navel,	the	seminal	point	is	moved	forcefully	upwards,
and,	through	the	engagement	of	speech,	it	is	elevated	with	the	support	of	guttural
gasps	pronounced	as	‘HI-KA	HI-KA’.	Through	the	force	of	the	vital	energy
below,	the	seminal	point	is	unable	to	resist	being	accelerated	upwards	through
the	central	channel.	By	this	method,	it	is	moved	upwards,	with	seven	HI-KA
gasps,	to	the	navel.	Then,	with	a	further	seven	HI-KA	gasps	it	reaches	the	heart,
with	a	further	seven	it	reaches	the	throat,	and	with	a	further	seven	it	reaches	the
space	between	the	eyebrows.	Then,	uttering	HI-KA,	[a	final	time],	the	seminal
point	makes	contact	with	the	syllable	HAṂ	at	the	crown	fontanelle,	after	which
one	should	visualise	that	it	spins	downwards	again	and	comes	to	rest	below	the
navel	as	a	white	diffusion.	Rest	in	that	state	for	some	time.
By	simply	repeating	this	exercise	a	few	times,	signs	will	emerge	that	this
[training	in]	consciousness	transference	has	taken	effect:	a	sensation	of	warmth
will	well	up	at	the	crown	fontanelle,	and	there	will	be	sensations	of	prickliness,
irritation,	n