wn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	the	five	deep-seated
poisons,
May	all	the	peaceful	male	deities	draw	us	forward,

Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	five	pristine	cognitions	combined.
May	the	supreme	female	consorts,	Queens	of	the	Expanse,	support	us	from
behind,
And	may	the	male	and	female	gatekeepers	support	us	from	the	perimeter,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
At	this	time	when	we	dwell	within	the	intermediate	state	of	living,
The	forty-two	assembled	peaceful	deities,
Are	radiantly	present	within	the	celestial	palace	of	our	own	hearts,
Embodied	in	the	form	of	a	cluster	of	five-coloured	lights.
Yet,	as	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
This	assembly	of	peaceful	deities	will	emerge	from	our	hearts,
And	fill	the	space	before	us.
Each	of	the	innumerable	central	and	peripheral	forms
Will	 be	 [fully	 endowed	 with]	 the	 ornaments	 and	 attire	 [of	 the	 peaceful
deities],
15
Each	 composed	 of	 the	 five-coloured	 lights	 [indicative	 of	 the	 union]	 of
radiance	and	emptiness,
And	[encircled]	by	an	expanse	of	rainbow	light.
Vibrant	beaming	shafts	of	light,	indicative	of	the	five	pristine	cognitions,
Emanating	five[-coloured]	seminal	points,	sounds,	lights	and	rays,
Radiant,	vibrant,	resplendent,	clear,	and	naturally	resonant,
Will	beam	out,	as	if	piercing	our	hearts.
Concomitant	with	these	lights	of	the	five	pristine	cognitions,
The	six	light	paths	indicative	of	the	six	classes	of	deluded	impure	beings	will
also	dawn	before	us.
At	this	moment,	O	compassionate	assembly	of	peaceful	deities,
Blessed	Transcendent	Ones,	Beings	of	Compassion,
Do	not	withhold	your	compassion,
But	draw	us	forward	on	the	path	[of	radiant	light],
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined,
And	draw	us	back	from	the	paths	[of	the	dull	lights],
Which	are	[the	doors	to]	the	six	states	of	impure	[existence]!

	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	celestial	palace	of	perfect	resource,	within	one’s	own	throat,
Amidst	an	expanse	permeated	with	rainbows	and	lights,
In	the	central	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,
Is	Padmanaṭeśvara,	the	great	Awareness	Holder	of	Maturation,
Red	and	radiant,	glowing	in	[an	array	of]	five[-coloured]	lights,
And	embraced	by	the	Ḍākin
ῑ
	of	Pristine	Cognition,
[Their	union	symbolising	the	coalescence	of]	bliss	and	emptiness.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,
Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-body	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	eastern	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	who	Abides	on	the	Levels,
White,	radiant,	smiling,	and	embraced	by	the	White	Ḍākin
ῑ.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,
Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-mind	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	southern	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	with	Power	over	the	Lifespan,
Yellow,	radiant,	smiling,	and	embraced	by	the	Yellow	Ḍākin
ῑ.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,
Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-attributes	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	western	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	of	the	Great	Seal,
Red,	radiant,	smiling,	and	embraced	by	the	Red	Ḍākin
ῑ.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,

Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-speech	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	northern	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	of	Spontaneous	Presence,
Green,	radiant,	wrathful,	smiling,	and	embraced