re	is	time,	the	empowerments	of	the	way	of	secret
mantras	should	be	conferred.	Consequently,	by	dying	with	a	positive	momentum
of	 past	 actions,	 the	 individual	 who	 has	 [just	 received]	 these	 untainted
commitments	and	vows,	with	respect	to	the	nature	of	reality,
30
	will	be	liberated
from	inferior	existences,	and	there	will	be	inestimable	advantages.

In	the	case	of	a	person	who	cannot	do	even	that,	one	should	slowly	call	out	the
name	[of	the	dying	one],	saying,	‘Lord	Mahākāruṇika	is	present	on	the	crown	of
your	head!	Be	reverential!’	One	should	stroke	the	crown	of	his	or	her	head	and
gently	pull	the	hair	above	the	crown	fontanelle.	Thereby,	the	consciousness	will
[be	encouraged	to]	exit	from	the	crown	fontanelle.
In	 the	 case	 of	 those	 who	 cannot	 do	 even	 that,	 and	 whose	 capacity	 is
indistinguishable	from	that	of	animals,	one	should	repeat	the	words,	many	times,
‘Homage	to	Buddha	Ratnaketu!’,	directing	these	[words]	towards	the	head	[of
the	dying	person].	As	a	consequence,	they	will	certainly	be	liberated	from
[rebirth	in]	the	inferior	existences,	because,	when	in	the	past	this	buddha	made
his	aspirational	prayer,	he	did	so,	saying,	‘May	all	who	hear	my	name	be
liberated	from	[rebirth	in]	the	inferior	existences!’	Alternatively,	if	one	calls	out
the	name	of	the	[Medicine]	Buddha	Bhaiṣajyaguru	Vaiḍūryaprabharāja,	it	is	said
that	just	by	hearing	his	name,	[the	dying	person]	will	be	protected	from	the
sufferings	 of	 inferior	 existences.	 Similarly,	 one	 may	 call	 out	 the	 name	 of
whichever	buddha	one	may	know,	and	recite	whichever	blessed	heart-mantra	one
may	know,	such	as	the	Six-syllable	Mantra.
In	particular,	if	one	has	at	hand	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing
,
31
	
one	should	read
this	aloud,	and	also	recite	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
,
32
	repeating	whichever
aspirational	prayers	one	may	know.	Since	the	positive	momentum	of	[the	dying
person’s]	past	actions	can	thereby	be	secured,	this	will	be	most	advantageous.	In
the	worst	cases,	it	is	said	that	simply	by	dying	with	the	body	lying	down	on	the
right	side	and	the	head	pointing	north,	[that	person]	will	not	proceed	into	inferior
existences.
CONCLUSION
In	summary,	since	it	is	essential	that	all	the	advantages	[that	accrue	from]
practising	the	teachings	should	converge	at	the	time	of	death,	it	is	extremely
important	to	become	skilled	[during	one’s	lifetime]	in	the	process	of	dying.
[This	completes]	the	
Guide	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	the	Time	of	Death
entitled	
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through	Recollection
.
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!

11
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
CONTEXT
Traditionally,	the	procedures	followed	when	a	lama	visits	a	dying	or
deceased	person	are	intricate	and	prolonged,	and	will	vary	depending	on
whether	the	person	is	about	to	die,	has	just	recently	died,	or	has	been
dead	for	some	days.
When	a	person	is	approaching	death,	it	is	customary	for	the	relatives
or	close	friends	to	seek	the	assistance	of	a	fully	qualified	lama.	The	lama
should	be	motivated	by	a	sincere	compassion	for	all	sentient	beings	and
should	 have	 mastered	 in	 his	 own	 mental	 continuum	 the	 direct
experiential	 cultivation	 of	 the	 dying	 processes,	 as	 well	 as	 the
consciousness	transference	practices.
It	 is	 very	 important	 that	 when	 coming	 in	 to	 the	 household,	 the
attending	lama	is	concentrated	on	the	motivation	to	free	the	dying	person
from	the	sufferings	of	cyclic	existence.	Very	often	the	mere	presence	of
an	 accomplished	 lama	 can	 create	 a	 solid	 sense	 of	 calm	 and
purposefulness,	which	inspires	both	the	dying	person	and	family.
The	formal	practice	begins	with	the	attending	lama	taking	refuge	in	the
Buddha,	 the	 sacred	 teachings,	 and	 the	 ideal	 spiritual	 community,	 on
behalf	 of	 the	 dying	 person	 and	 all	 other	 sentient	 beings,	 including
himself.	At	this	point,	the	lama	should	visualise	in	the	space	in	front	of
himself	 images	 of	 the	 three	 objects	 of	 refuge	 -	 the	 Buddha,	 sacred
teachings	and	ideal