ntration.
[Here],	there	is	no	duality	between	abiding	and	non-abiding.
	
Though	there	is	a	vast	plethora	of	discordant	modes	of	conduct,
Within	this	intrinsic	awareness,
Which	is	the	unique	seminal	point	of	pristine	cognition,
There	is	no	duality	between	the	action	and	the	actor.
Without	focusing	on	the	action,	search	for	the	actor!
Though	one	searches	for	this	actor,	none	will	be	found.
So,	at	that	instant,	one	will	be	brought	to	the	exhaustion	point	of	conduct.
At	that	very	moment,	one	will	encounter	the	innermost	boundary	of	conduct.
Since,	from	the	beginning,	there	has	been	no	conduct	to	undertake,
And	since	one	has	not	fallen	under	the	sway	of	bewildering	propensities,
The	lucid	uncontrived	awareness,	which	is	now	present,
Is	itself	pure	conduct,	without	having	to	be	contrived,	modified,	accepted	or
rejected.
[Here],	there	is	no	duality	between	purity	and	impurity.
Though	there	is	a	vast	plethora	of	discordant	results,

Within	this	intrinsic	awareness,
Which	is	the	true	nature	of	mind,	the	spontaneous	presence	of	the	three
buddha-bodies,
There	is	no	duality	between	the	object	of	attainment	and	the	attainer.
Without	focusing	on	the	attainment	of	the	result,	search	for	the	attainer!
Though	one	searches	for	this	attainer,	none	will	be	found.
So,	at	that	instant,	one	will	be	brought	to	the	exhaustion	point	of	the	result.
At	that	very	moment,	one	will	encounter	the	innermost	boundary	of	the	result.
Since,	whatever	the	[projected]	result,	there	is	nothing	to	be	attained,
And	since	one	has	not	fallen	under	the	sway	of	rejection	and	acceptance,	or
hope	and	doubt,
The	naturally	radiant	awareness,	which	is	now	spontaneously	present,
Is	the	fully	manifest	realisation	of	the	three	buddha-bodies,	within	oneself.
[Here],	there	is	the	result,	atemporal	buddhahood	itself.
[SYNONYMS	FOR	AWARENESS]
This	awareness,	free	from	the	eight	extremes,	such	as	eternalism	and	nihilism
[and	so	forth],
Is	called	the	‘Middle	Way’,	which	does	not	fall	into	any	extremes.
It	is	called	‘awareness’	because	mindfulness	is	uninterrupted.
It	is	given	the	name	‘Nucleus	of	the	Tathāgata’
Because	emptiness	is	[naturally]	endowed	with	this	nucleus	of	awareness.
If	one	understands	this	truth,	one	reaches	perfection	in	all	respects,
For	 which	 reason,	 this	 [awareness]	 is	 also	 called	 the	 ‘Perfection	 of
Discriminative	Awareness’.
Furthermore,	it	is	called	the	‘Great	Seal’	because	it	transcends	the	intellect	and
is	atemporally	free	from	extremes,
And,	further,	it	is	called	the	‘Ground-of-all’,
Because	[this	awareness]	is	the	ground	of	all	joys	and	sorrows	associated	with
cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa	—
The	 distinction	 between	 these	 being	 contingent	 on	 whether	 or	 not	 this
[awareness]	is	realised.
[Further],	this	radiant	and	lucid	awareness	is	itself	referred	to	as	‘ordinary
consciousness’,
On	account	of	those	periods	when	it	abides	in	its	natural	state	in	an	ordinary

non-exceptional	way.
Thus,	however	many	well-conceived	and	pleasant-sounding	names	are	applied
to	this	[awareness],
In	reality,	those	who	maintain	that	these	names	do	not	refer	to	this	present
conscious	awareness,
But	to	something	else,	above	and	beyond	it,
Resemble	someone	who	has	already	found	an	elephant,	but	is	out	looking	for
its	tracks	[elsewhere].
	
Though	one	were	to	scan	the	[entire]	external	universe,
[Searching	for	the	nature	of	mind],	one	would	not	find	it.
Buddhahood	cannot	be	attained	other	than	through	the	mind.
Not	recognising	this,	one	does	indeed	search	for	the	mind	externally,
Yet,	how	can	one	find	[one’s	own	mind]	when	one	looks	for	it	elsewhere?
This	is	like	a	fool,	for	example,	who,	when	finding	himself	amidst	a	crowd	of
people,
Becomes	mesmerised	by	the	spectacle	[of	the	crowd]	and	forgets	himself,
Then,	no	longer	recognising	who	he	is,	starts	searching	elsewhere	for	himself,
Continuously	mistaking	others	for	himself.
	
[Similarly],	since	one	does	not	discern	the	abiding	nature,
Which	is	the	fundamental	reality	of	[all]	things,
One	is	cast	into	cyclic	existence,	not