state	 is	 also	 called	 ‘the	 pure	 illusory	 body’.	 [During	 this	 second	 phase],
consciousness	achieves	an	instance	of	clarity,	even	though	the	deceased	may	not
know	 whether	 or	 not	 they	 are	 dead.	 If	 the	 teaching	 is	 given	 at	 this	 time,
therefore,	the	mother	and	child	aspects	of	reality	can	meet,
34
	and	[the	deceased]
will	no	longer	be	controlled	by	the	force	of	past	actions.	Just	as,	for	example,
darkness	is	destroyed	by	the	light	of	the	sun,	the	controlling	force	of	past	actions
is	destroyed	by	this	‘inner	radiance	of	the	path’	and	liberation	is	attained.
Now,	this	so-called	‘second	intermediate	state’	[occurring	at	that	point	when
consciousness	leaves	the	body]	is	one	which	suddenly	
appears	to	the	‘mental
body’	[assumed	by	the	deceased],
35
	while	the	consciousness	[of	the	deceased]
retains	the	same	range	of	hearing	as	before.	If	the	above	oral	teaching	is	given	at
this	time,	its	purpose	can	therefore	be	accomplished.	Since	the	bewildering
appearances	generated	by	past	actions	have	not	yet	arisen,	[the	deceased]	is	able
to	direct	his	or	her	attention	anywhere.	Therefore,	even	though	[the	individual]
may	not	have	attained	recognition	of	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground,	he	or	she
will	be	liberated	by	the	recognition	of	the	inner	radiance	[of	the	path],	which	is
the	second	intermediate	state.
INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	REALITY
If	liberation	is	still	not	attained	through	the	above	[introductions],	then	the
intermediate	 state	 of	 reality,	 also	 called	 ‘the	 third	 intermediate	 state’,	 will
arise.
36
	It	is	during	this	third	phase	that	the	bewildering	apparitions,	[which	are

the	products]	of	past	actions,	emerge.	Therefore,	it	is	extremely	important	to	read
aloud	the	following	
Great	Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Reality
37
	
at
this	juncture.	It	is	most	powerful	and	beneficial.
At	around	this	time,	the	bereaved	relatives	will	be	crying	and	expressing	their
grief.	They	will	no	longer	be	serving	[the	deceased’s]	share	of	food,	they	will
have	removed	his	or	her	clothes,	and	stripped	down	the	bed,	and	so	forth.
Although	[the	deceased]	can	see	them,	they	cannot	see	the	deceased.	Although
the	deceased	can	hear	them	calling	out,	they	cannot	hear	the	departed	one	calling
back.	So,	[the	deceased]	may	turn	away	in	a	state	of	despair.
At	this	time,	three	phenomena	-	sounds,	lights	and	rays	of	light	-	will	arise,
and	[the	deceased]	may	faint	with	fear,	terror	or	awe.	Thus,	during	this	period,
the	following	
Great	Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Reality
	should	be
given.	Call	the	deceased	by	name	and	say	the	following	words,	with	correct
pronunciation	and	clear	diction:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	very	intently	and	without	distraction.	There
are	six	kinds	of	intermediate	state,	namely:	the	intermediate	state	of	living	or
natural	existence,	the	intermediate	
state	of	dreams,	the	intermediate	state	of
meditative	stability	or	concentration,	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,
the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 reality,	 and	 the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 consequent
rebirth.
38
	
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 [during	 and	 after	 death],	 you	 will
experience	three	intermediate	states:	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,
the	intermediate	state	of	reality	and	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	Of	these
three,	it	was	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	which	you	experienced
until	yesterday.	Although	the	inner	radiance	of	reality	arose	during	that	time,
you	did	not	recognise	it.	So	now,	[as	a	result],	you	have	been	compelled	to
wander	here;	and	now	you	will	experience	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,
followed	by	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	You	must	therefore	recognise,
without	 distraction,	 [the	 instruction	 and	 events]	 which	 I	 am	 now	 going	 to
introduce	to	you.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	that	which	is	called	death	has	now	arrived.	You
are	leaving	this	world.	But	in	this	you	are	not	alone.	This	happens	to	everyone.
Do	not	be	attached	to	t