y	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	[in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource].
Yet,	even	after	receiving	this	introduction,	there	are	those	who,	owing	to	their
negative	 habitual	 tendencies,	 will	 nevertheless	 flee	 in	 awe	 and	 terror.	 Not
recognising	their	own	meditational	deities,	they	will	perceive	them	as	Yama	and
thereby	the	recognition	will	not	occur.	So	it	is	that,	on	the	eleventh	day,	the

assembled	deities	of	the	Padma	family	of	blood-drinking	deities	will	come	to
escort	the	deceased.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	[listen	without	distraction].	On	the	eleventh	day,	he
who	is	called	the	transcendent	lord	Padma	Heruka,	of	the	Padma	family	of
blood-drinking	deities,	will	arise	from	the	western	direction	of	your	brain,	in
union	with	his	consort,	and	appear	vividly	before	you.	His	body	is	dark	red	in
colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set	apart.	His	right	face
is	white,	the	left	blue,	and	the	central	face	is	dark	red.	In	his	six	hands	he	holds,
on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	lotus,	in	the	middle	one,	a	khaṭvāṅga	and	in	the
last	hand	a	mace	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand	he	holds	a	bell,	in	the	middle
one,	a	blood-filled	skull	and	in	the	last	a	small	drum.	The	female	consort
Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around	his
neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Contemplate	them
with	joy.	Recognise	this	to	be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are
your	own	meditational	deities,	so	do	not	be	terrified.	This,	in	reality,	is	the
transcendent	lord	Amitābha	and	his	consort,	so	be	devoted	to	them!	Recognition
and	liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	[in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource].
Yet,	even	after	receiving	this	introduction,	there	are	those	who	are	held	back
by	their	negative	habitual	tendencies	and	there	are	those	who	will	not	recognise
their	 meditational	 deities	 because	 they	 have	 fled	 in	 awe	 and	 terror.	 The
recognition	 not	 having	 been	 attained,	 so	 it	 is	 that,	 on	 the	 twelfth	 day,	 the
assembled	deities	of	the	Karma	family	of	blood-drinking	deities,	followed	by	the
Gaur
ῑ
,	the	Piśāc
ῑ
,	the	Female	Gatekeepers,	and	the	Īśvar
ῑ
,	will	come	to	escort	the
deceased.	 Since	 an	 even	 greater	 fear	 and	 terror	 will	 arise	 if	 these	 are	 not
recognised,	again,	call	the	deceased	by	name,	and	offer	the	introduction	in	the
following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	When	the	twelfth	day
comes,	he	who	is	called	the	transcendent	lord	Karma	Heruka,	of	the	Karma

family	of	blood-drinking	deities,	will	arise	from	the	northern	direction	of	your
brain,	in	union	with	his	consort,	and	appear	vividly	before	you.	His	body	is	dark
green	in	colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set	apart.	His
right	face	is	white,	the	left	red,	and	the	central	face	is	an	awesome	dark	green.	In
his	six	hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	sword,	in	the	middle	one,
a	khaṭvāṅga	and	in	the	last	hand	a	mace	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand	he	holds
a	bell,	in	the	middle	one,	a	skull	and	in	the	last	a	ploughshare.	The	female
consort	Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around
his	neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to
be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are	your	own	meditational
deities,	 so	 do	 not	 be	 terrified.	 This,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Amoghasiddhi	 and	 his	
consort,	 so	 regard	 them	 with	 intense	 devotion!
Recognition	and	liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hea