as	the	natural	sound	of	reality	reverberates	like	a	thousand	peals	of
thunder,
May	all	sounds	be	transformed	into	the	resonance	of	the	Six	Syllables.
	
When	I	am	driven	on	by	past	actions,	unable	to	find	a	refuge,
May	the	Great	Compassionate	One,	Mahākāruṇika,	protect	me,
And	as	I	experience	the	suffering	of	habitual	tendencies	and	past	actions,

May	the	meditative	stabilities	of	inner	radiance	and	bliss	[naturally]	arise.
	
Say	this	aspirational	prayer	with	ardent	longing;	it	will	certainly	lead	you	on	to
the	path.	Be	absolutely	certain	that	this	[aspirational	prayer]	will	not	deceive
you.	This	is	most	important!
Through	these	words,	[the	deceased]	will	regain	his	or	her	focus,	and	recognition
will	occur.	Then,	liberation	will	be	attained.
[OBSTRUCTION	OF	THE	WOMB	ENTRANCES]
Even	though	this	introduction	may	have	been	given	many	times,	due	to	the
potency	of	strong	negative	past	actions,	recognition	may	be	difficult.	It	is	very
beneficial,	 therefore,	 to	 repeat	 [the	 introduction]	 now,	 many	 times.	 Again,
therefore,	calling	to	the	deceased	by	name,	you	should	say	the	following	words
[at	least]	three	times:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	have	not	taken	to	heart	[the	introduction]
which	has	gone	before,	from	now	on,	the	body	of	your	past	life	will	grow	more
faint	and	the	body	of	your	next	life	will	grow	more	vivid.	At	this,	you	will	be
dismayed,	and	you	will	think:	‘I	am	experiencing	such	misery!	Now	I	will	look
for	whatever	kind	of	body	I	can	find.’	Thinking	in	this	way,	you	will	move
haphazardly	and	randomly	towards	whatever	might	appear	and	consequently	the
six	lights	indicative	of	the	six	realms	of	living	beings	will	dawn;	and,	according
to	your	past	actions,	[the	light	of	the	realm]	into	which	you	are	to	be	born	will
shine	the	most	of	all.	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen!	What	are	these	six
lights,	you	may	ask?	A	dull	white	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the	gods	will
arise.	A	dull	red	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the	antigods	will	arise.	A	dull
blue	light	indicative	of	the	human	realm	will	arise.	A	dull	green	light	indicative
of	the	animal	realm	will	arise.	A	dull	yellow	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the
anguished	spirits	will	arise	and	a	dull	smoky	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the
hell-beings	 will	 arise.	 These	 six	 lights	 will	 emerge.	 And	 at	 this	 time,	 your
[present]	body	will	take	on	the	colour	of	the	light	of	the	realm	into	which	you	are
to	be	born.	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	at	this	juncture,	the	essential	points	of
the	oral	instructions	are	extremely	important.
Meditate	now	on	the	light	[that	dawns]	as	being	Mahākāruṇika!	Meditate	on
the	thought	that	when	the	light	dawns,	it	is	Mahākāruṇika.	This	is	the	most

profound	crucial	point.	It	is	
extremely	important,	because	[this	oral	instruction]
obstructs	birth.
Alternatively,	you	should	meditate	for	a	long	time	on	your	meditational	deity,
whichever	 it	 may	 be.	 [Meditate	 on	 the	 deity]	 appearing	 like	 an	 illusion,
completely	free	from	inherent	existence.	This	is	called	[the	practice	of]	the	‘pure
illusion-like	body’.	Accordingly,	dissolve	[the	form	of]	the	meditational	deity
from	the	extremities	[inwards],	until	it	disappears	completely,	and	abide	in	the
[resultant]	state	of	emptiness	and	radiance,	where	nothing	at	all	substantially
exists	and	where	there	is	no	subjective	apprehension.	Meditate	yet	again	on	the
meditational	deity.	Meditate	again	on	the	inner	radiance.	Meditate	alternately	in
this	way,	and	after	this,	dissolve	your	awareness	itself	from	the	extremities
[inwards,	 into	 emptiness	 and	 radiance].	 Wherever	 there	 is	 space	 there	 is
awareness.	Wherever	there	is	awareness	there	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.
Abide	nakedly,	therefore,	in	the	state	of	the	unimpeded	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
free	from	conceptual	elaboration.	[Abiding]	in	this	state,	birth	will	be	obstructed
and	buddhahood	will	be	attained.
	
Yet,	those	unfamiliar	with	meditative	experience	and	those	very	weak	in	their
practice	will	not	be	able	to	und