r	the	rituals.	The	sense	of	bewilderment	at
the	death	of	a	loved	one	is	strongly	tempered	by	the	purposefulness	in	the
activity	directed	at	supporting	and	inspiring	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased.
12
	
These	prayers	are	read	to	the	dying	person	in	order	to	inspire	a	calm	and
dignified	approach	to	death.	For	the	full	text	of	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	Calling
to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
	(
Sangs-rgyas-dang	byang-chub
sems-dpa’i-rnams-la	ra-mda’	sbran-pa’i	smon-lam
);	the	
Aspirational	Prayer
which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	’jigs-skyob-ma’i
smon-lam
),	and	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Rescues	from	the	Dangerous
Pathways	of	the	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	’phrang-sgrol-gyi	smon-lam
),	see
Ch.	12;	and	for	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do’i	rtsa-
tshig
),	see	above,	Ch.	3.	The	attitude	in	which	the	dying	person	approaches	death
is	regarded	as	the	most	essential	factor	in	ensuring	the	continued	well-being	of
the	individual.	For	the	dying	individual	to	cultivate	an	attitude	of	compassion
towards	others	during	the	process	of	death	is	regarded	as	primary.	Remaining
fearless	and	fully	aware	of	the	processes	of	dying,	whilst	also	being	prepared	to

recognise	the	qualities	of	awareness	which	naturally	arise	during	and	after	the
moment	of	death,	is	strongly	encouraged.
13
	
Tib.	
’chi-kha’i	bar-do-la	’od-gsal	ngo-sprod-pa
.	This	is	the	introduction	to
the	radiance	which	arises	immediately	after	the	ceasing	of	respiration	at	the
moment	when	the	vital	energies	collect	at	the	mid-point	of	the	central	channel,
close	to	the	heart.	See	also	above,	Ch.	8,	pp.	173-7,	and	Ch.	10,	pp.	205-9,	where
reference	is	also	made	to	this	intermediate	state.
14
	
Tib.	chos-nyid	bar-do-la	’od-gsal	ngo-sprod-pa
.	This	is	the	introduction	to
the	radiance	experienced	by	the	mental	body	of	the	deceased	in	the	form	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	See	pp.	234-72;	also	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The
Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	77-102.
15
	
Tib.	
srid-pa	bar-do-la	mngal-sgo	dgag-thabs	bstan-pa
.	The	final	section	of
this	chapter	describes	five	profound	methods	for	avoiding	uncontrolled	rebirth	in
an	unfavourable	realm.	See	pp.	285-300;	also	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The
Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	105-28.
16
	
In	this	context,	the	advice	is	to	invite	to	the	bedside	an	individual	who	has
followed	the	same	meditational	practices	as	the	dying	person.
17
	
In	this	context,	the	advice	is	to	invite	to	the	bedside	an	individual	who	has
studied	and	practised	within	the	same	commentarial	tradition.
18
	
i.e.
	the	central	energy	channel	of	the	body.
19
	
This	period	during	which	vital	energy	and	consciousness	are	united	in	the
central	channel	is	also	described	as	that	in	which	the	‘inner	breath’	(
nang-dbugs
	
)
remains	within	the	body.	It	is	said	to	last	approximately	twenty	minutes.
20
	
Tib.	
bar-do	dang-po’i	’od-gsal
,	
i.e.
	the	inner	radiance	which	arises	at	the
culmination	of	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	is	the	first	of	three
successive	‘intermediate	states’	that	occur	after	death	and	prior	to	the	rebirth
process.	They	comprise	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground,	the	inner	radiance	of
the	path,	and	the	inner	radiance	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	in	the
intermediate	state	of	reality.	These	three	phases	are	not	to	be	confused	with	the
classical	enumeration	of	the	six	intermediate	states	as	described	in	Ch.	3	and	in
the	glossary.
21
	
Throughout	the	death	process	and	at	each	step	in	the	reading	of	the	
Great
Liberation	by	Hearing
,	the	presiding	lama	should	enter	into	those	meditative

states	of	awareness	which	the	text	describes	and	which	the	dying	person	is
encouraged	to	cultivate.	In	this	way,	he	serves	as	a	support	and	anchor	for	the
concentration	of	the	dying	and	the	deceased.
22
	
Tib.	
rtsa	rba-rlabs	rtsis-ba
.	Tibetan	medicine	describes	diverse	types	of	pulse
which	indicate	impending	death	due	to	humoral	imbalance,	visceral	failure	and
so	forth.	See	
Tibetan	Medical	P