will	not
recover.	There	are	four	[modes	of	actual	consciousness	transference],	namely:

consciousness	 transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Reality;	 consciousness
transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource;	 consciousness
transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Emanation;	 and	 the	 consciousness
transference	of	ordinary	persons.
Concerning	 these,	 it	 is	 said	 [in	 the	
Root	 Verses	 of	 the	 Six	 Intermediate
States
]:
15
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	[all]	attachment,	yearning	and	subjective	apprehension	in	every
respect,
I	must	undistractedly	enter	the	path,	on	which	the	oral	teachings	are	clearly
understood,
And	eject	my	own	awareness	into	the	uncreated	expanse	of	space.
	
Now,	when	the	signs	of	the	onset	of	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death
are	provoked	by	fatal	illnesses,	at	this	time,	when	the	indications	of	death	are
completely	present,	there	are	oral	instructions	which	bring	clearly	to	mind	that
which	may	be	
obscured	during	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death.	[The
clarity	of	these	instructions]	is	likened	to	[the	clarity	of]	an	elegant	lady	looking
into	a	mirror.	These	[instructions]	are	twofold:	a	clarification	which	is	elucidated
by	another
16
	and	a	clarification	undertaken	by	oneself.
In	 the	 former	 context:	 regardless	 of	 whether	 or	 not	 one	 perceives	 the
unequivocal	presence	of	the	signs	of	[one’s	own	impending]	death,	these	signs
will	be	recognised	by	the	physician	and	by	the	nurses,	based	on	[their	knowledge
of]	 the	 behavioural	 changes	 which	 occur.
17
	 Nonetheless,	 if	 one’s	 own
mindfulness	remains	clear,	one	should	also	examine	the	indications	of	near	death
of	one’s	own	accord.	In	any	case,	when	[it	is	thus	ascertained	that]	one	is	dying,
an	invitation	should	be	sent	to	one’s	root	spiritual	teacher	if	he	or	she	lives
nearby,	and	all	one’s	possessions	should	be	offered	to	the	teacher,	without	even	a
single	instant	of	attachment.	If	one	remains	even	slightly	attached	[to	worldly
goods],	one	may	be	cast	into	inferior	existences,	as	recounted	in	the	story	of	the
monk	Barwasum.
18
If	an	individual	is	unable	to	make	such	offerings	in	actuality,	these	should	be
offered	 mentally,	 and	 thereby	 a	 complete	 state	 of	 renunciation	 should	 be
achieved.	In	particular,	one	should	not	leave	any	object	at	all	close	to	[the	dying
person]	which	could	give	rise	to	attachment	or	aversion.	This	is	the	sense	of	the

verse	‘Renouncing	[all]	attachment,	yearning	and	subjective	apprehension	in
every	respect.’	At	this	time,	renunciation	should	be	generated	stainlessly.	As	it	is
said	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Coalescence	of	Sun	and	Moon
:
19
	
In	particular,	one	should	please	with	offerings	and	feasts
One’s	own	spiritual	teacher,	the	monastic	community,
And	the	field	of	accumulated	merits.
20
	
Once	the	spiritual	teacher	has	arrived,	one	should	confess	any	former	violations
or	breaches	of	the	commitments,	if	any;	and	make	amends	for	any	transgressions
or	downfalls	previously	committed.	If	one	holds	any	vows,	these	should	be
reaffirmed,	and	if	no	vows	are	held,	these	should	be	taken	on	the	basis	of	the
Rite	of	Going	for	Refuge
.
21
	Then,	if	one	has	had	previous	experience	in	[the
practice	 of]	 consciousness	 transference,	 one	 should	 assume	 the	 appropriate
bodily	posture,	and	the	visualisation	should	be	
repeatedly	elucidated	by	one’s
spiritual	teacher,	in	accordance	with	the	[specific	tradition]	of	consciousness
transference	one	formerly	practised.
22
	Thereupon,	it	should	take	effect.	As	an
indication	of	success,	as	soon	as	one	has	expired,	the	signs	that	this	transference
has	been	effective,	such	as	blood	or	serous	fluid	[appearing]	at	a	swelling	on	the
crown	of	the	head,	will	certainly	emerge.
If	these	signs	do	emerge,	there	will	be	no	need	to	elucidate	the	intermediate
states.	But	if	they	do	not	appear,	the	spiritual	teacher	should	place	his	or	her	lips
close	to	the	ear,	or	else	place	a	bamboo	reed	or	a	h