d.
22
	
Tib.	
rtsa	rba-rlabs	rtsis-ba
.	Tibetan	medicine	describes	diverse	types	of	pulse
which	indicate	impending	death	due	to	humoral	imbalance,	visceral	failure	and
so	forth.	See	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	p.	137.	On	the	procedures	followed	in
pulse	palpation,	see	ibid.,	p.	123.
23
	
Tib.	
gnyid-log	rtsa-gnyis
.	The	two	carotid	arteries	‘which	induce
unconsciousness	when	pressed’,	are	included	among	the	body’s	most	vulnerable
points.	See	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	33,	43.	Pressure	applied	at	the	right
moment	is	said	to	trap	the	vital	energy	and	mind	together	in	the	central	channel,
with	no	possibility	of	regression	or	reversal.	Correct	training	in	this	procedure	is
of	crucial	importance,	and	it	is	obviously	essential	that	the	carotids	are	not
pressed	until	after	the	pulse	has	ceased.
24
	
On	the	crown	or	anterior	fontanelle	(Tib.	
tshangs-bug
;	Skt.	
brahmarandhra
),
which	is	the	optimum	point	of	exit	for	the	consciousness	of	the	dying	individual,
see	Ch.	10,	p.	214.
25
	
The	period	following	the	cessation	of	the	coarse	outer	breath	(
phyi-dbugs
)
and	before	the	cessation	of	the	subtle	inner	breath	(
nang-dbugs
),	also	known	as
the	life-sustaining	vital	energy	(Tib.	
srog-’dzin-gyi	rlung
;	Skt.	
prāṇa
),	is	that
during	which	the	vital	energy	and	mind	are	drawn	together	into	the	central
channel,	causing	ordinary	beings	to	lapse	into	unconsciousness	(
shes-pa	brgyal
).
This	moment	is	also	described	in	terms	of	the	blackness	induced	by	the	merging
of	the	white	male	and	red	female	generative	essences	at	the	heart-centre	of	the
central	channel.	See	Ch.	8,	p.	175.
26
	
The	Tibetan	biographical	tradition	cites	many	instances	of	great	spiritual
teachers	who	at	the	time	of	their	demise	enter	into	the	prolonged	experience	of
this	intermediate	state.
27
	
See	Ch.	10,	p.	203.
28
	
See	Ch.	8,	p.	173ff.	An	alternative	description	of	this	process	is	also	given	in
medical	texts.	See	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	51-2:	‘Upon	the	sinking	of	the
earth	element	into	the	water	element,	the	patient	ceases	to	grasp	the	solidity	of
objects.	Upon	the	sinking	of	the	water	element	into	the	fire	element,	the	sensory
orifices	dry	up.	Upon	the	sinking	of	the	fire	element	into	the	wind	
element,

bodily	heat	disappears.	Upon	the	sinking	of	the	wind	element	into	the	space
element,	breathing	stops.	As	far	as	the	five	sensory	organs,	born	out	of	the	five
primordial	elements,	are	concerned,	the	first	to	cease	functioning	is	sight,	then
comes	the	ability	to	hear,	followed	by	the	senses	of	smell,	taste	and	finally	touch.
Consequent	on	this	tactile	loss,	life	itself	wanes;	and	all	sensory	functions
dissolve	into	the	life-sustaining	breath,	which	itself	vanishes	into	consciousness,
destined	for	future	rebirth.’
29
	
On	the	relationship	between	the	various	orifices	from	which	serum	is	exuded
and	the	realms	inhabited	by	sentient	beings,	see	Ch.	10,	p.	214;	also	A.	Wayman,
The	Buddhist	Tantras
,	Ch.	12,	pp.	139-50,	whose	account	is	based	on	the
commentarial	literature	of	the	
Guhyasamāja	Tantra
.
30
	
The	harsh	and	bewildering	experiences	related	to	past	actions	(
las-kyi	’khrul-
snang
	
)	are	those	manifestations	of	sound,	lights	and	rays	of	light	which	appear
during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	(
chos-nyid	bar-do
),	in	contrast	to	the
terrifying	experiences	related	to	Yama	(
gshin-rje
)	which	occur	during	the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth	(
srid-pa’i	bar-do
).	See	p.	234ff	and	pp.	268-9.
31
	
Since	the	meditational	deities	are	pure	appearances	inseparable	from
emptiness,	they	are	said	to	‘appear	and	yet	lack	inherent	existence’	(
snang-la
rang-bzhin	med-pa
)	and	to	be	‘devoid	of	solid	or	corporeal	forms’	(
gdos-bcas
med-pa
).	See	also	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	123-7,	279-80;	Longchen
Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	626-81.
32
	
i.e.
	Avalokiteśvara.
33
	
On	the	risk	of	inferior	rebirth	(
ngan-song
)	which	confronts	those	who	have
broken	their	vows	(
sdom-pa	shor-ba
)	and	failed	to	maintain	their	basic
commitments	(
rtsa-ba’i	dam-tshig	nyams
),	see	Ch.	7;	als