ss,	O	regal	vajra[-master]!
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	master	meditative	stability,
And	failed	to	distinguish	[the	characteristics	of]	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	assistant
vajra-master,
15
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	lamp	of	the	Buddhist	teachings!
16
	
Should	 we	 have	 interrupted	 [the	 stabilisation	 of]	 the	 seals	 through	 our
laziness,
For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the	 ritual
officiant,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	master	of	ritual	activities!
Should	we	have	failed	to	reach	the	highest	criteria	when	engaged	in	the
practices	of	sexual	yoga,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	female
consorts,	the	embodiments	of	discriminative	awareness,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	secret	mother,	consort	who	embodies	awareness!
	
Should	 we	 have	 lacked	 the	 power	 to	 maintain	 meditative	 stability	 when
engaging	in	rites	of	‘liberation’,
For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the	 male
‘liberating’	avengers,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	[Citipati],	master	of	‘liberating’	avengers!
17
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	please	the	buddha-mind	of	the	wrathful	female
emanations,

For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the
[gatekeeping]	messengers	who	summon	and	guide,
18
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	[female	gatekeepers],	who	swiftly	enact	the	rites!
	
Should	 we	 have	 broken	 the	 continuous	 expression	 of	 love	 and	 affection
through	our	laziness,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	our	brothers	and
sisters,	[our	companions]	on	the	path	to	enlightenment,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	vajra-brothers	and	sisters!
	
Should	we	have	allowed	our	commitments	to	degenerate	out	of	trivial	banter,
For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 those
[protectors]	who	determine	the	outer	and	inner	[boundaries	of	our	precepts],
We	 seek	 your	 forgiveness,	 O	 you	 [protectors]	 who	 keep	 vigil	 over	 the
commitments!
	
Should	we	have	consumed	our	resources	[accumulated	for	the	feast-offering],
And	allowed	the	first	fruits	of	the	residual	offering	to	be	spoiled,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	subterranean
goddesses	within	the	outer	retinue,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Please	be	patient	[with	us],
And	bestow	your	pure	spiritual	accomplishments	upon	us!
PLAINTIVE	CONFESSION	OF	RAMPANT	EGOHOOD
19
OṂO	great	compassionate	and	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva,
Whose	supremely	exquisite	form,	immaculate	and	white,
Is	suffused	by	a	pure	inner	radiance,	glowing	like	a	hundred	thousand	suns
and	moons,
[Emanating]	heroic	rays	of	light,	which	illuminate	the	chiliocosm,
You	who	are	known	as	the	guide	and	teacher	of	the	three	levels	of	existence,
The	unique	friend	to	all	living	beings	of	the	three	world-systems,
O	lord	of	loving	kindness,	deity	of	compassion,	please	attend	to	us!

	
From	 beginningless	 time,	 without	 end,	 I	 have	 roamed	 throughout	 cyclic
existence	—
Led	astray	by	the	momentum	of	my	mistaken	past	actions	and	improper	past
behaviour,
I	have	mistaken	the	path	and	become	lost	on	the	path.
I	regret	with	powerful	remorse	the	negative	past	actions	I	have	committed,	of
any	kind.
Drawn	by	the	momentum	of	momentary	yet	violently	resonant	past	acts,
I	have	sunk	into	this	ocean	of	suffering,	the	sea	of	cyclic	existence.
The	fires	of	blazing	hatred	have	unabatingly	seared	my	mind,
The	dense	darkness	of	delusion	has	blinded	my	discriminative	awareness,
The	ocean	coasts	of	desire	have	drowned	my	consciousness,
The	mountain	of	fierce	pride	has	entombed	me	in	the	lower	existences,
The	cruel	whirlwind	of	envy	has	sucked
20
	me	into	these	turning	worlds,
Where,	entwined	by	the	tight	knot	of	egocentricity,
I	have	fallen	into	the	pit	of	desire,	this	chasm	of	blazing	fires.
Unbearably	brutal	misery	has	poured	down	on	me	like	heavy	rain.
[Damaged]	by	such	extreme	and	unbearable	sufferin