t	of	egocentricity,
I	have	fallen	into	the	pit	of	desire,	this	chasm	of	blazing	fires.
Unbearably	brutal	misery	has	poured	down	on	me	like	heavy	rain.
[Damaged]	by	such	extreme	and	unbearable	suffering,
[Seared]	by	the	blazing	ferocious	fires	of	my	negative	past	actions,
The	shoots	of	my	consciousness	and	sense	faculties	have	been	blunted.
If	my	body,	this	illusory	aggregate,	can	no	longer	withstand	[all	this	pain],
How	 can	 you	 bear	 [to	 witness]	 this,	 O	 Compassionate	 Lord	 of	 Loving
Kindness?
21
	
Obscured	fool	[that	I	am,	burdened	by]	the	most	negative,	evil	past	acts,
Propelled	by	the	momentum	of	these	past	actions,
I	have	taken	birth	as	the	personification	of	rampant	egohood	within	this
world-system	of	desire.
I	regret	having	taken	such	birth,	and	am	dismayed	by	my	past	acts!
Yet,	regardless	of	my	regret	and	my	dismay,	past	actions	cannot	be	re-made.
The	momentum	of	past	actions	is	as	strong	as	a	river’s	inexorable	flow,
So	how	can	the	mighty	river	of	past	actions	be	reversed	in	a	mere	moment!
All	that	ripens	is	born	from	one’s	own	past	actions,
And	I	am	one	who	has	been	swept	along	by	the	violent	whirlwind	of	my	past
actions,

And	accordingly	have	roamed	over	countless	past	aeons,
Lost	within	the	dark	prisons	of	cyclic	existence.
O	Lord	of	Loving	Kindness,	through	the	blessing	of	your	compassion,
Purify	the	obscurations	[generated	by]	my	past	actions	and	dissonant	mental
states,
And	secure	me	in	the	presence	of	your	mother-like	loving	kindness!
	
Here	am	I,	continuously	yearning	for	the	sight	of	your	compassionate	face,
Which	shines	with	a	luminosity	like	that	of	the	sun,
And	radiates	with	a	clarity	like	that	of	the	moon.
Yet	my	darkened	eyes,	blinded	by	the	cataracts
22
	of	beginningless	ignorance,
Are	unable	to	see	you,
O	Lord	of	Living	Beings,	where	are	you	[now]?
	
When	I	am	terrified	by	the	utterly	unbearable	and	virulent	power	of	past
actions,
And	my	hair	stands	on	end,	out	of	fear,
I	call	out	this	lament,	in	heartfelt	passion,
And	cry	out	[to	you]	in	a	voice	of	utter	despair!
O	Lord	of	Loving	Kindness,	if	you	do	not	attend	[to	me]	with	compassion
now,
At	the	time	of	my	death,	when	my	mind	and	body	separate,
When	I	am	cut	off	from	the	company	of	spiritual	friends,	and	dragged	away
by	Yama,
At	that	time,	when	my	relatives	stay	behind	in	the	world,
Yet	I	alone	am	led	away	by	the	power	of	past	actions,
At	that	time,	I	will	be	unprotected	and	without	a	refuge.
So,	do	not	on	any	account	hesitate	or	delay	now,
But	draw	near	to	me	at	this	very	moment,
And	enact	the	wrathful	rites	of	‘liberation’.
	
Beings	such	as	I,	who	are	afflicted	by	past	actions,
Have	been	subject	to	misconceptions	since	beginningless	time.
As	a	result,	we	have	not	achieved	release	from	the	[turning]	states	of	cyclic
existence.
Indeed,	beings	such	as	I	have	assumed	such	a	countless	number	of	corporeal

forms,
During	countless	births	in	countless	aeons,
That	if	our	flesh	and	bones	were	to	be	collected	together,
Their	accumulated	mass	would	fill	this	world,
And	if	our	pus	and	blood	were	to	be	collected	together,
Their	accumulated	mass	would	fill	a	vast	ocean,
And	if	the	residue	of	our	past	actions	were	to	be	collected	together,
Their	extent	would	be	beyond	conception	and	inexpressible.
Though	I	have	continued	endlessly	in	a	cycle	of	births	and	deaths,
Throughout	the	three	world-systems,
The	actions	that	I	have	committed	have	been	pointless	and	unproductive.
Yet,	from	amongst	all	these	many	countless	births,
The	actions	committed	in	the	course	of	just	a	single	lifetime
Could	have	been	worthwhile	if	only	I	had	trained	well,
Pursued	the	path	of	unsurpassed	enlightenment,
And	thus	attained	the	genuine	final	nirvāṇa.
But,	 swayed	 by	 the	 virulence	 of	 past	 actions	 and	 the	 great	 potency	 of
dissonant	mental	states,
I	 have	 assumed	 bodies,	 these	 networks	 of	 flesh	 and	 blood,	 and	 roamed
throughout	cyclic	existence,
Thrust	into	[a	succession	of]	prison-like	existences,
Where	the	suffering	is	hard	to	bear.
All	my	transgressions,	resonant