place,
May	I	achieve	an	exalted	body,	adorned	with	the	auspicious	major	and	minor
marks.
Once	I	have	achieved	birth	in	a	supreme	human	form,
May	I	act	so	as	to	swiftly	liberate	all	who	see	and	hear	me.
And	may	I	not	be	influenced	by	my	negative	past	actions,
But	multiply	and	emulate	my	past	merits.
	
Wherever	I	may	be	born,	in	whatever	land	it	may	be,
May	I	quickly	encounter	the	meditational	deity	of	my	past	lives.
Knowing,	from	immediately	after	birth,	how	to	speak	and	walk,

May	I	remember	my	past	lives	and	attain	the	power	of	non-forgetfulness.
	
May	I	easily	come	to	master	by	study	and	reflection,
The	manifold	stages	of	learning	-	small,	intermediate	and	great.
May	the	country	into	which	I	am	born	be	auspicious,
And	may	all	sentient	beings	be	blessed	with	happiness.
	
O,	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Conquerors,	may	I	and	all	others
Become	entirely	at	one	with	you,	and	come	to	resemble	you,
In	all	your	forms,	your	retinues,	your	lifespan	and	your	buddha	fields,
And	in	every	quality	of	your	supreme	auspicious	marks.
	
Through	the	compassion	of	Samantabhadra	and	the	infinite	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities,
By	the	power	of	the	truth	of	pure	reality,
And	by	the	blessing	of	the	mantrins	who	practise	one-pointedly,
May	[every	wish	of]	this	aspirational	prayer	be	fulfilled.
	
This	prayer	entitled	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the
Intermediate	States
	
was	composed	by	the	preceptor	from	Oḍḍiyāna,	Padmākara.
May	this	profound	sacred	teaching	not	be	extinguished	until	all	the	worlds	of
cyclic	existence	have	been	emptied.
	
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
This	is	a	treasure-text	of	
Tulku
	Karma	Lingpa.

13
A	Masked	Drama	of	Rebirth
CONTEXT
This	allegorical	play	portrays	the	experiences	of	the	archetypal	evil-doer
Lakṣanāraka	and	the	archetypal	virtuous	householder	Śrῑjāta	as	they	meet
with	Yama,	the	embodiment	of	the	inexorable	laws	of	cause	and	effect,	in
the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	This	lighthearted	masked	drama	is	still
commonly	 performed	 today	 during	 public	 ceremonial	 occasions
throughout	Tibet,	Bhutan	and	the	Buddhist	regions	of	the	Himalayas.	The
play	 is	 staged,	 often	 to	 huge	 audiences,	 in	 the	 courtyards	 or	 public
ceremonial	areas	of	a	monastery,	often	at	the	time	of	the	annual	10th	day
sacred	dances	commemorating	the	life	of	Padmasambhava.

PART	ONE
Herein	 is	 contained	 [a	 masked	 drama	 entitled]	
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 the
Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth:	A	Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural	Expression	of
Virtue	and	Negativity,	in	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
;
1
	which	is	an	extract
from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching	[entitled]
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	the	uncreated	Buddha-body	of	Reality:
Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
	in	union;
To	the	unceasing	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource:
The	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Lotus	Deities;
And	to	the	naturally	arising	Buddha-body	of	Emanation:	Padmākara.
May	[all	beings]	be	liberated	in	the	intermediate	state!
	
Having	earlier	presented	the	empowerments	and	introductions
From	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States,	An	extract	from
the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Lotus	Deities
,
3
And	having	introduced	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,	which	is	the	‘great
liberation	by	seeing’,
4
Now	 I	 will	 present	 [a	 means	 of	 demonstrating]	 the	 introduction	 to	 the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth.
5
THE	SCENE
Here,	having	completed	the	previous	introductions	[to	the	intermediate	states	of
the	time	of	death	and	reality],	I	will	present	[in	the	form	of	a	masked	drama]	the
introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	The	spiritual	teacher	[should
now	appear	fully	
attired]	in	the	costume	of	Yama	Dharmarāja,	and	wear	a	large
wrathful	mask,	depicting	Yama.	He	is	carrying	a	large	wooden	slate	in	his	right
hand,	and	in	his	left	he	holds	a	large	round	mirror.	Dressed	in	a	silk	brocade
gown,	he	is	seated	on	a	great	throne.	In	his	retinue,	there	is	a	fi