y,	these	introductions	to	the	three	intermediate	states	of	the	time	of
death,	reality	and	rebirth	should	be	supplemented,	if	appropriate,	by	the	practice
of	the	transference	of	consciousness,	as	presented	in	Chapter	10.	If	the	internal
and	 external	 signs	 are	 very	 good,	 consciousness	 transference	 will	 not	 be
necessary	and	could	even	be	potentially	harmful.
The	attending	lama	must	take	great	care	as	to	if	and	when	consciousness
transference	should	be	practised.	It	is	not	only	highly	
realised	spiritual	masters
who	remain	in	meditation	during	these	intermediate	states,	but	even	ordinary
men,	women,	and	children	may	have	achieved	a	settled	state	of	mind,	enabling
them	to	remain	in	peaceful	and	deep	meditation	after	death.	If	consciousness
transference	were	performed	in	such	cases,	the	deceased	would	be	disturbed.
Moreover,	since	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	has	a	tendency	to	leave	the
body	from	whichever	point	it	is	touched,	the	relatives,	loved	ones	and	the

attending	lama	should	refrain	from	touching	the	body	or	only	tap	the	crown
fontanelle	in	order	to	induce	the	consciousness	to	leave	from	that	point.
If	 the	 attending	 lama	 decides	 that	 consciousness	 transference	 is	 the
appropriate	course	of	action,	it	should	be	repeated	many	times	until	certain
indications	occur,	such	as	the	emergence	of	mucus	or	blood	from	both	nostrils.
Further,	in	order	to	induce	the	consciousness	to	leave	the	body	via	the	crown,
which	is	the	optimum	gateway	for	the	transference	to	take	effect,	the	means	of
preventing	the	consciousness	from	leaving	through	other	orifices	as	described	in
Chapter	10	should	be	applied.	This	is	facilitated	by	visualising	that	the	nine
orifices	of	the	body	are	each	sealed	by	a	single	HŪṂ	syllable,	thus	forcing	the
consciousness	to	exit	via	the	crown	fontanelle.
In	any	event,	if	the	attending	lama	feels	that	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased
has	become	confused	and	trapped,	or	if	the	corpse	begins	to	decompose	and	lose
its	radiance,	then	consciousness	transference	should	be	immediately	performed.
Once	the	introductions	to	the	intermediate	states	of	the	time	of	death,	reality,
and	rebirth	have	been	concluded,	the	attending	lama	should	then	recite:	the
Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher
	
(Chapter	2),	the	
Natural	Liberation
of	Habitual	Tendencies
	(Chapter	5),	the	
Hundredfold	Homage
	(Chapter	6),	the
Confession
	(Chapter	7),	and	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing
	(Chapter	14).
At	this	juncture	the	attending	lama	may	read	certain	general	prayers	not
included	within	the	present	cycle,	such	as	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	for	Good
Conduct
	(
Bodhisattvapraṇidhānarāja
,	T	1095),	one	of	the	many	versions	of	the
Aspirational	Prayer	for	Rebirth	in	Sukhāvat
ῑ
	
(contained	in	
bDe-smon	Phyogs-
sgrigs
),	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	of	Maitreya
	
(
Maitreyapraṇidhāna
,	T	1096),	and
the	 final	 chapter	 of	 the	
Introduction	 to	 the	 Conduct	 of	 a	 Bodhisattva
(
Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra
,	T	3871),	which	concerns	the	dedication	of	merit	on
behalf	of	all	sentient	beings.
These	may	be	followed	by	a	further	recitation	of	prayers	specific	to	the
present	cycle,	namely	the:	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
	(Chapter	3)
and	the	
Aspirational	Prayers
	(Chapter	12).
This	completes	the	summary	of	the	process	through	which	the	attending	lama
tends	directly	to	the	consciousness	of	the	dying	person	and	the	deceased.

PART	ONE
An	Elucidation	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	the	Time	of	Death	and
of	the	Appearance	of	the	Peaceful	Deities	in	the	Intermediate
State	of	Reality
Herein	is	contained	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,
1
	an	elucidation	of	the
intermediate	state	of	reality,	[which	is	an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	the	spiritual	teachers,	[embodiment	of]	the	Three	Buddha-
bodies:
To	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	Infinite	Light,	Amitābha;
To	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	the