the	preceptor	from	Oḍḍiyāna.
May	[the	influence	of]	this	sacred	teaching	not	be	extinguished	until	cyclic
existence	has	been	emptied!
8
This	prayer	was	brought	forth	from	Mount	Gampodar,	which	resembles	a
dancing	god,	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa.

3
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
CONTEXT
According	to	this	cycle	of	teachings,	the	circle	of	birth	and	death	can	be
seen	as	being	composed	of	six	intermediate	states.	These	six	modalities
of	existence:	our	waking	living	state,	dreaming,	meditation,	the	time	of
death,	and	the	two	successive	phases	of	the	after-death	state	are	defined
in	the	glossary.
This	poem	emphasises	the	centrally	important	perspective	that	relates
to	 each	 of	 these	 states.	 It	 is	 recommended	 that	 practitioners	 should
memorise	these	verses	and	recite	them	repeatedly,	while	reflecting	on
their	meaning,	throughout	their	lives.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
.
1
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Conquerors,	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
	
The	root	verses	concerning	the	six	intermediate	states	are	as	follows:
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	living
2
	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	laziness,	for	which	there	is	no	time	in	this	life,
I	must	enter	the	undistracted	path	of	study,	reflection	and	meditation.
Taking	perceptual	experience	and	[the	nature	of]	mind	as	the	path,
I	must	cultivate	actualisation	of	the	three	buddha-bodies.
Now,	having	obtained	a	precious	human	body,	this	one	time,
I	do	not	have	the	luxury	of	remaining	on	a	distracted	path.
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	dreams	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	the	corpse-like,	insensitive	sleep	of	delusion,
I	must	enter,	free	from	distracting	memories,	the	state	of	the	abiding	nature	of

reality.
Cultivating	[the	experience	of]	inner	radiance,
Through	the	recognition,	emanation,	and	transformation	of	dreams,
I	must	not	sleep	like	a	beast,
But	 cherish	 the	 experiential	 cultivation	 which	 mingles	 sleep	 with	 actual
[realisation].
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	meditative	concentration	arises	before
me,
Renouncing	the	mass	of	distractions	and	confusions,
I	must	undistractedly	enter	a	state,
Which	is	devoid	of	subjective	apprehension,	and	free	from	the	[two]	extremes,
And	attain	stability	in	the	stages	of	generation	and	perfection.
At	this	moment,	having	renounced	activity,
And	having	attained	a	singular	[concentration],
I	must	not	fall	under	the	sway	of	bewildering	mental	afflictions!
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death
3
	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	[all]	attachment,	yearning	and	subjective	apprehension	in	every
respect,
I	must	undistractedly	enter	the	path,	on	which	the	oral	teachings	are	clearly
understood,
And	eject	my	own	awareness	into	the	uncreated	expanse	of	space.
Immediately	upon	separation	from	this	compounded	body	of	flesh	and	blood,
I	must	know	[this	body]	to	be	like	a	transient	illusion.
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
4
	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	the	merest	sense	of	awe,	terror	or	fear,
I	must	recognise	all	that	arises	to	be	awareness,	manifesting	naturally	of	itself.
Knowing	[such	sounds,	lights	and	rays]	to	be	visionary	phenomena	of	the
intermediate	state,
At	this	moment,	having	reached	this	critical	point,
I	must	not	fear	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	which	manifest
naturally!
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth
5
	arises	before	me,
I	must	with	one-pointed	intention	concentrate	my	mind,

And	resolutely	connect	with	the	residual	potency	of	my	virtuous	past	actions.
I	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrance	and	call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal.
This	is	the	time	when	perseverance	and	purity	of	perception	are	imperative.
I	must	give	up	all	jealousy	and	meditate	on	my	spiritual	teacher	with	consort.
	
From	the	mouth	of	the	accomplished	masters	come	these	words:
‘O,	[you],	with	your	mind	far	away,	thinking	that	death	will	not	come,
Entranced	by	the	pointless	activities	of	this	life,
If	you	were	to	return