ib.	
rlung-yum	shor-ba
.
26
	
Note	that	DR	(p.	191,	1.	2)	and	the	Indian	reprints	all	read	‘six	months’	(
zla-
ba	drug
).
27
	
For	a	discussion	on	the	elaborate	procedures	for	urinalysis	in	general,	see
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	139-48,	and	295-304.
28
	
On	this	portent	known	as	‘setting	of	the	unchanging	sun	at	the	summit	of
Mount	Sumeru’	(
ri-rab	rtse-la	mi-’gyur	nyi-ma	nub
),	the	method	of	ritually
averting	death	is	unspecified	in	Ch.	9.	Note	that	the	Delhi	reprint	has	an
annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	there	are	small	circles	of	light,	this	portends
that	the	subject	will	fall	ill’.
29
	
The	Delhi	reprint	has	an	annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	there	is	a	slight
humming	sound,	this	portends	that	the	subject	will	fall	ill’.
30
	
On	this	portent	known	as	‘rupturing	of	the	Wish-granting	Tree	from	the
Summit	of	Mount	Sumeru’	(
ri-rab	rtse-nas	dpag-bsam	ljon-shing	chag
),	the
method	of	ritually	averting	death	is	unspecified	in	Ch.	9.	Note	that	the	Delhi
version	has	an	annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	there	is	a	slight	trace	of
evaporation,	this	portends	that	the	subject	will	fall	ill’.
31
	
Yavati	is	more	specifically	identified	as	an	acolyte	of	Mahākāla,	or	as	an
aspect	of	Pehar.	The	Delhi	version	has	an	annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	the
tuft	of	hair	stands	up	alone	for	a	short	time,	this	portends	that	one	will	fall	ill’.
On	the	posterior	and	pterion	fontanelles	subsumed	in	the	phrase	
ltag-pa’i	bdud-
sgo-dag
,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintin
gs,	pp.	249-50.
32
	
Tib.	
’chi-ltas	thor-bu
.	On	this	category	of	signs,	which	are	also	classified	as
‘sudden	changes	relating	to	death’	(
glo-bur	rnam-gyur-gyi	’chi-ltas
)	within	the
Tibetan	medical	tradition,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	207-8.
33
	
See	Chapter	10	for	these	practices.
34
	
As	stated	in	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	p.	56,	the
sequence	may	alter	as	far	as	the	dissolution	of	the	outer	elements	is	concerned.
35
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	a
mirage,	and	the	subject’s	vision	will	become	unclear.	On	this	dissolution	of	the

earth	element	into	the	water	element,	and	its	coincidence	with	the	disintegration
of	the	navel	energy-centre	of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of
Mindfulness
,	pp.	54-5.
36
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	a
misty	smoke;	and	the	subject’s	hearing	will	become	unclear.	On	this	dissolution
of	the	water	element	into	the	fire	element,	and	its	coincidence	with	the
disintegration	of	the	heart	energy-centre	of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	p.	55.
37
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	red
fireflies,	and	the	subject’s	ability	to	smell	will	cease.	The	location	of	the	body
from	which	the	warmth	recedes	indicates	the	place	of	subsequent	rebirth,	as
indicated	on	pp.	177-9.	On	this	dissolution	of	the	fire	element	into	the	air
element,	and	its	coincidence	with	the	disintegration	of	the	throat	energy-centre
of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
	
,	p.	55.
38
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	a
flaming	torch,	and	the	subject’s	ability	to	taste	will	cease.	On	this	dissolution	of
the	wind	element	into	the	space	element	or	consciousness,	and	its	coincidence
with	the	disintegration	of	the	sexual	energy-centre	of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok
Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	55-6.	The	five	sense-faculties	and	the
sensory	spectra	are	also	dissolved	at	this	juncture.	From	this	point	onwards,
death	cannot	be	reversed.
39
	
Note	that	in	other	texts	of	this	genre,	the	descent	of	whiteness	precedes	the
ascent	of	redness.	However,	Jigme	Lingpa	in	his	
sKu-gsum	zhing-khams	sbyong-
smon
	follows	the	sequence	outlined	here,	and	according	to	Tsele	Natsok
Rangdrol,	op.	cit.,	p.	57,	it	is	uncertain	whether	the	whiteness	or	redness	will
manifest	first.
40
	
Tib.	
srog-rtsa.
	The