[also]	clearly	visualises	that	[each	of]	the	orifices	[of	one’s
body]	is	blocked	by	the	syllable	HŪṂ;	but	if	this	is	not	visualised,	one	should
focus	one’s	consciousness	single-pointedly	within	the	central	channel,	without
mentally	engaging	the	orifices.
Then,	one’s	bodily	weight	should	be	[drawn	in	and]	concentrated	upwards,
and	the	rectum	forcefully	closed.	The	eyes	should	be	turned	upwards,	and	the
tongue	[lifted	to]	rest	along	the	[upper]	palate.	The	lower	vital	energy	should	be
moved	upwards,	while	focusing	one’s	consciousness	within	the	central	channel.
Then,	in	conjunction	with	a	series	of	HI-KA	HI-KA	gasps,	[the	seminal	point]
should	be	moved	successively	upwards	until	it	reaches	the	crown	fontanelle.
There,	 it	 breaks	 open	 the	 orifice	 of	 the	 crown	 fontanelle,	 which	 had	 been
blocked	by	the	syllable	HAṂ,	and	shoots	upwards,	like	an	arrow,	blazing	with
white	light,	and	then	it	dissolves	into	the	heart	of	the	meditational	deity	[seated
above].	One’s	awareness	should	then	be	focused	upwards	into	the	heart	of	the
meditational	deity,	and	without	letting	it	descend,	it	should	be	repeatedly	drawn
in,	and	absorbed	[into	the	deity’s	heart].	Then,	finally,	[the	visualisation	of]	the
meditational	deity	should	also	be	dissolved	into	a	non-referential	state.	If	one’s

breath	 ceases	 while	 [resting]	 in	 that	 state,	 one	 will	 attain	 the	 status	 of	 an
awareness	 holder,	 inseparable	 from	 the	 meditational	 deity;	 and	 achieve
buddhahood	in	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource.
If	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
does	take	effect	in	the	above	manner,	as	an	‘outer	
sign’,	the	sky	will	be	filled
with	rainbows	and	light;	and	as	an	‘inner	sign’,	blood	or	serous	fluid	will	emerge
from	the	crown	fontanelle	at	the	top	of	the	head,	or	dew-like	drops,	swellings,
and	so	forth	will	also	appear.	The	‘secret	signs’	include	the	appearance	of	any
one	of	the	five	types	of	bone	relic,	and	the	appearance	of	[bone	relics]	shaped
like	the	physical	form	or	hand-implement	of	a	deity,	and	so	forth.
26
Such	 is	 the	 consciousness	 transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource.	SAMAYA!
Consciousness	Transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation
As	for	the	appropriate	bodily	posture,	one	should	lay	the	body	down	on	its	right
side,	since	[this	position]	will	facilitate	the	departure	of	the	vital	energy	from	the
left	nostril.	Then,	one	should	request	that	a	statue,	relief,	or	drawing	of	the
Buddha-body	of	 Emanation	 be	placed	 in	front	 of	 oneself.	This	 could	 be	 a
representation	of	the	Great	Sage	[Śākyamuni	Buddha],	the	King	of	Medicine
[Vaiḍūryaprabharāja],	Maitreya,	or	Padmasambhava	of	Oḍḍiyāna;	or	it	could	be
an	image	of	one’s	own	spiritual	teacher	or	spiritual	friend.	Offerings	should	be
extensively	arrayed	before	the	[image].	If	no	image	is	actually	present,	clearly
visualise	one,	and	make	mentally	imagined	offerings.
Then,	 all	 those	 present,	 oneself	 and	 others,	 should	 make	 the	 following
aspirational	prayer,	saying,	‘Now,	may	I,	consequent	on	my	death,	for	the	sake	of
all	sentient	beings,	take	birth	in	an	emanational	body;	and	may	this	be	of
extensive	 benefit	 to	 all	 living	 beings!	 May	 this	 emanational	 body	 also	 be
endowed	with	the	major	and	minor	marks,	and	may	there	be	no	obstacles	to	its
lifespan	and	enlightened	activity!	May	I	be	reborn	as	a	great	awareness	holder,
holding	the	lineage	of	the	buddhas	of	the	three	times!’
Mentally,	 too,	 one	 should	 retain	 this	 fervent	 aspiration	 [constantly],	 and
visualise	that	within	the	utterly	translucent	central	channel,	the	essence	of	one’s
awareness	is	located	in	a	triangle	below	the	navel,	in	the	form	of	a	white	seminal
point,	tinged	with	red,	which	is	glistening	and	concentrated,	and	on	the	verge	of
rising	upwards.	Immediately,	the	rectum	should	be	closed	and	drawn	in,	so	that

there	is	no	option	but	for	the	seminal	point	to	
be	forced	upwards	by	the	power	of
the	vital	energy	below.	Then,	by	means	of	HI-KA	H