literature	into	eighteen	books	(
tantras
)	—	the	most	all-embracing	of	which
is	the	
Guhyagarbha
.	During	the	eighth	century,	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	was
translated	into	Tibetan	from	Sanskrit	three	times:	initially	by	Buddhaguhya	and
Vairocana,	 secondly	 by	 Padmasambhava	 and	 Nyak	 Jñānakumāra,	 and
definitively	by	Vimalamitra	with	Nyak	Jñānakumāra	and	Ma	Rinchen	Chok.	A
much	later	indigenous	Tibetan	translation	was	also	prepared	in	the	fifteenth
century	by	Tharlo	Nyima	Gyeltsen	and	Go	Lotsāwa.	The	anthology	of	treatises
related	to	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	
includes	a	large	number	of	commentaries	on
this	text,	of	both	Indian	and	Tibetan	origin,	composed	by	illustrious	masters	such
as	L
ῑ
lāvajra,	Buddhaguhya,	Rongzom	Paṇḍita,	Longchen	Rabjampa	and	Lochen
Dharmaśr
ῑ.
The	iconography	and	symbolism	of	the	hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
presented	in	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	subsequently	
gave	rise	to	a	whole	genre	of
literature	in	Tibet	known	as	the	Cycles	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	(
zhi-
khro
),	among	which	our	compilation	of	texts	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in
the	Intermediate	States
	is	the	most	influential.
THE	CLOSE	LINEAGE	OF	TREASURES
According	 to	 traditional	 accounts,	 when	 Padmasambhava	 introduced	 these

teachings	to	Tibet	in	the	eighth	century	he	foresaw	that	the	oral	transmission	of
the	 ‘long	 lineage’	 would	 be	 subjected	 over	 time	 to	 corruption	 and
misapplication,	and	that	the	efficacy	of	the	teachings	would	be	diminished.	To
counteract	this,	through	the	agency	of	his	consort	Yeshe	Tsogyal	and	other
foremost	disciples,	he	concealed	a	large	number	of	‘treasure-teachings’	(
gter-
chos
),	 in	 the	 form	 of	 books	 and	 sacred	 artefacts,	 at	 power-places	 (
gnas
)
throughout	the	Tibetan	plateau,	predicting	that	they	would	be	rediscovered	in
future	 generations	 by	 their	 respective	 ‘treasure-finders’	 (
gter-ston
)	 and
promulgated	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 future	 generations.	 Prophecies	 were	 written,
describing	those	who	would	have	the	power	to	unearth	such	revelations	in	the
future	—	figures	of	the	calibre	of	Nyangrel	Nyima	Ozer,	Guru	Chowang,	and	the
discoverer	of	our	text,	Karma	Lingpa.	The	term	‘treasure-teachings’	is	generally
extended	 to	 include	 not	 only	 concealed	 ‘earth-treasures’	 (
sa-gter
),	 but	 also
revelations	 discovered	 in	 a	 telepathic	 manner	 directly	 from	 the	 enlightened
intention	of	buddha-mind	(
dgongs-gter
),	and	pure	visionary	experiences	(
dag-
snang
).
This	notion	of	the	concealment	of	texts	in	the	form	of	treasure	had	precedents
in	both	Indian	and	Chinese	Buddhism.	Nāgārjuna,	for	example,	is	said	to	have
received	the	
Prajñāpāramitā	Sūtras
	in	the	form	of	treasure	from	the	ocean-
depths,	and,	according	to	Nyingma	doxographers,	a	recension	of	
Mahāyoga
Tantras
	
was	revealed	to	the	eight	teachers	of	Padmasambhava,	at	the	S
ῑ
tavana
charnel	ground	near	Vajrāsana.	Similarly,	the	Chinese	Buddhist	tradition	of
elemental	divination,	which	includes	aspects	of	
Feng	Shui
	and	
Yi	Jing
,	also
recounts	how	the	bodhisattva	Mañjughoṣa	concealed	certain	divinatory	texts	on
Wang	Hai	Feng,	the	Eastern	Peak	of	the	sacred	Mount	Wutai	Shan.	Tibetan
sources	 then	 describe	 how	 Mañjughoṣa	 subsequently	 revealed	 the	
Precious
Clarifying	Lamp
	(
Rinchen	gsal-ba’i	sgron-me
)	to	the	Chinese	master	Dahura
Nagpo.
Since	the	initial	discoveries	of	the	first	Tibetan	‘treasure-finder’	Sangye	Lama,
in	the	eleventh	century,	a	vast	literature	has	been	produced	in	Tibet	by	way	of
revelation	through	the	‘close	lineage	of	treasures’	(
nye-brgyud	gter-ma
),	and
redacted	 within	 the	 public	 domain.	 The	
Collected	Treasures
	 of	 the	 various
treasure-finders	are	too	voluminous	to	mention	here,	but	many	of	their	works	are
represented	in	the	extensive	nineteenth-century	anthology	known	as	the	
Store	of
Precious	Treasures
	(
Rinchen	gter-mdzod
),	which	was	recently	republished	in	76
volumes.	Just	as	the	anthology	of	the	‘long	lineage’	contains	many	commentaries
on	the	
Guh