at	the	
Bar-do	Thos-grol	Chen-mo
,	the
Tibetan	 Book	 of	 the	 Dead
,	 a	 treasure-text	 which	 focuses	 on	 this	 important
subject,	has	become	one	of	the	best-known	works	of	Tibetan	literature	in	the
West.	Carrying	out	the	first	complete	translation	of	this	cycle	of	teachings	has
been	an	extraordinary	accomplishment	undertaken	with	great	care	over	many
years.
I	hope	that	the	profound	insights	contained	in	this	work	will	be	a	source	of
inspiration	and	support	to	many	interested	people	around	the	world,	as	they	have
been	in	my	own	culture.

Editor’s	Introduction
The	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	includes	one	of	the	most	detailed	and	compelling
descriptions	 of	 the	 after-death	 state	 in	 world	 literature.	 It	 is	 not	 surprising
therefore	that	when	Chapter	11	of	our	text,	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’,
first	appeared	in	English,	in	1927,	it	caused	a	considerable	stir	and	has	remained
one	of	the	most	well	known	of	Tibet’s	literary	works	ever	since.	In	our	work,	for
the	first	time,	we	are	presenting	a	complete	translation	of	all	twelve	chapters	of
the	compilation	of	texts	known	as	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
,	which	includes
nine	chapters	not	translated	in	W.	Y.	Evans-Wentz’s	original	publication.
Our	intention	in	carrying	out	this	work	was	twofold.	One	was	to	present	the
entire	original	work,	and	the	second	was	to	compose	the	translation	with	the
close	support	and	participation	of	the	contemporary	masters	and	lineage	holders
of	this	tradition.
The	complete	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	is	a	comprehensive	guide	to	both
living	 and	 dying	 as	 originally	 taught	 by	 the	 great	 master	 from	 Oḍḍiyāna,
Padmasambhava.	Padmasambhava,	along	with	Sāntarakṣita	and	King	Trisong
Detsen,	formally	established	Buddhism	in	Tibet,	during	the	eighth	century,	and
most	Tibetans	revere	him	as	a	‘second	Buddha’.	The	story	of	how	this	teaching
was	first	given	by	Padmasambhava	to	King	Trisong	Detsen	is	presented	in
Gyurme	Dorje’s	‘Brief	Literary	History’,	which	follows.
The	compendium	of	texts	known	as	
The	Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	contains
exquisitely	written	guidance	and	practices	related	to	transforming	our	experience
in	daily	life,	on	how	to	address	the	processes	of	dying	and	the	after-death	state,
and	on	how	to	help	those	who	are	dying.	These	teachings	include:	methods	for
investigating	and	cultivating	our	experience	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	in	our
daily	 practice	 (Chapters	 2-7),	 guidance	 on	 the	
recognition	 of	 the	 signs	 of
impending	death	and	a	detailed	description	of	the	mental	and	physical	processes
of	dying	(Chapter	8),	rituals	for	the	avoidance	of	premature	death	(Chapter	9),
the	now	famous	guide	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’	that	is	read	to	the
dying	and	the	dead	(Chapter	11),	aspirational	prayers	that	are	read	at	the	time	of
death	(Chapter	12),	an	allegorical	masked	play	that	light-heartedly	dramatises
the	journey	through	the	intermediate	state	(Chapter	13),	and	a	translation	of	the
sacred	mantras	that	are	attached	to	the	body	after	death	and	are	said	to	bring

‘Liberation	by	Wearing’	(Chapter	14).
In	addition,	and	at	the	advice	of	the	late	HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	Rinpoche,	we
have	also	included	two	additional	texts	that	are	not	usually	included,	namely
Chapter	1,	which	poetically	sets	out	the	preliminary	meditations	and	practices
related	to	this	cycle	of	teachings,	and	indeed	to	tantric	practice	in	general,	and
Chapter	10,	the	instructions	on	methods	for	transferring	consciousness	at	the
point	of	death	into	an	enlightened	state,	which	are	referred	to	in	Chapter	11	and
are	an	essential	aspect	of	the	practices	related	to	dying.
Our	second	intention	was	to	present	the	entire	work	in	a	way	that,	as	honestly
as	we	could,	reflects	the	insights	and	intentions	of	the	masters	of	the	lineage	and
gives	a	sense	of	the	elegance	and	moving,	poetic	beauty	of	the	original	work.	In
order	to	do	this,	as	is	described	in	the	Acknowledgements,	the	translation	has
been	 based	 on	 the	 oral	 commentarial	 explanation	 of	 contemporary	 lin