will	emerge	that	this
[training	in]	consciousness	transference	has	taken	effect:	a	sensation	of	warmth
will	well	up	at	the	crown	fontanelle,	and	there	will	be	sensations	of	prickliness,
irritation,	numbness,	and	swelling,	while	the	crown	of	the	head	will	seem	to
become	supple	and	numb,	and	serous	fluid,	blood,	and	so	forth	will	emerge	at
the	crown	fontanelle.	When	this	occurs,	the	spiritual	teacher	should	carefully
examine	the	crown	fontanelle:	a	peacock	feather	or	stalk	
of	grass	should	be
inserted	 [into	 the	 fontanelle]	 so	 that	 it	 settles	 into	 [the	 fontanelle].	 This
[insertion]	confirms	that	the	training	in	consciousness	transference	has	been
successfully	achieved.
If	 you	 do	 not	 stop	 at	 this	 point,	 your	 practice	 can	 limit	 your	 lifespan.
Therefore,	one	should	cease	the	visualisation	and	yogic	exercises,	and	the	crown
of	the	head	should	be	massaged	with	butter	or	grain-seed	oil.	If,	on	the	other
hand,	the	signs	do	not	appear,	[the	seminal	point]	should	be	moved	upwards
many	times	by	vigorous	effort	until	the	signs	eventually	do	emerge.
Furthermore,	swelling	may	occur	on	the	crown	of	the	head,	and	if	[the	seminal
point]	 remains	 localised	 at	 the	 crown	 fontanelle	 [and	 the	 fontanelle	 is	 not
breached],	 headaches	 and	 similar	 [uncomfortable	 sensations]	 will	 occur.
Therefore,	one	should	visualise	that	the	syllable	HAṂ	at	the	crown	fontanelle	is
opened	 up,	 and	 that	 the	 seminal	 point	 emerges	 vertically	 from	 the	 crown
fontanelle,	touches	the	feet	of	the	spiritual	teacher	[visualised	above],	and	then
descends	again	through	the	fontanelle	to	rest	motionless	below	the	navel.	By
repeating	this	exercise,	just	a	few	times,	the	crown	fontanelle	will	be	opened,
blood	or	serous	fluid	will	certainly	emerge,	and	the	blade	of	grass	can	then	be

inserted.
After	this,	it	is	very	important	that	the	crown	fontanelle	be	re-blocked	by	the
syllable	HAṂ,	for	not	doing	so	could	limit	your	lifespan.
Subsequently	[in	training],	when	manoeuvring	the	seminal	point	up	and	down
within	the	central	channel	without	the	HI-KA	breathing	and	yogic	exercises,	it
remains	very	important	to	keep	the	crown	fontanelle	blocked	with	the	syllable
HAṂ.
The	[training	in]	consciousness	transference	should	be	practised	in	the	above
manner.
However,	because	HI-KA	is	a	mantra	which	reduces	the	lifespan,	this	should
only	 be	 used	 until	 [training	 in]	 consciousness	 transference	 is	 successful.
Otherwise,	after	[the	training]	has	been	successful,	do	not	resort	to	the	HI-KA
breathing.	If,	on	account	of	excessive	exertion,	one	overdoes	[the	training	in]
consciousness	 transference,	 one	 will	 run	 the	 risk	 of	 lapsing	 into	 perpetual
unconsciousness.	 In	 such	 cases,	 and	 if	 the	 consciousness	 has	 risen	 too
precipitously,	and	one	experiences	vertigo	and	so	forth,	one	should	beat	the	soles
of	the	feet	with	the	fists	and	massage	the	crown	of	the	head.	Then,	while
focusing	intensely	on	the	visualisation	of	an	extremely	heavy	golden	stūpa	on
the	 soles	 of	 the	 feet,	 one	 should	
perform	 many	 yogic	 jumps,	 so	 that	 [the
consciousness]	is	becalmed.	These	essential	points	are	to	be	generally	observed
in	the	course	of	the	practical	training.
The	‘consciousness	transference	of	the	training	phase’	which	has	just	been
described	should	be	carefully	practised	while	one	is	in	good	health,	and	before
the	signs	of	death	emerge.	SAMAYA!
THE	ACTUAL	APPLICATION	OF	CONSCIOUSNESS
TRANSFERENCE	AT	THE	TIME	OF	DEATH
[The	Timing	and	Context]
Secondly,	 the	 application	 phase	 refers	 to	 the	 actual	 transference	 of
consciousness,	which	is	to	be	undertaken	when	the	indications	of	death	are
unequivocally	present	and	when,	even	after	performing	the	[appropriate]	ritual
deception	of	death	[practice]	on	three	occasions,	it	is	indicated	that	one	will	not
recover.	There	are	four	[modes	of	actual	consciousness	transference],	namely:

consciousness	 transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Reality;	 consciousness
transference	 into	 the	 Buddha