risk	of	inferior	rebirth	(
ngan-song
)	which	confronts	those	who	have
broken	their	vows	(
sdom-pa	shor-ba
)	and	failed	to	maintain	their	basic
commitments	(
rtsa-ba’i	dam-tshig	nyams
),	see	Ch.	7;	also	Longchen	Rabjampa,
GGFTC,	pp.	1184-229.
34
	
On	this	convergence	of	the	mother	and	child	aspects	of	reality	(
chos-nyidma-
bu
	
),	which	are	identified	respectively	with	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	and
the	inner	radiance	of	the	path,	the	latter	cultivated	by	the	meditator	during	his	or
her	lifetime,	see	also	Ch.	8,	pp.	176-7.
35
	
The	experiences	of	the	‘mental	body’	(
yid-kyi	lus
)	during	the	intermediate
states	of	reality	and	rebirth	are	described	below	in	detail.	See	pp.	273-85.
36
	
The	intermediate	state	of	reality	is	here	referred	to	as	the	‘third	intermediate
state’	(
bar-do	gsum-pa
)	when	it	is	enumerated	following	the	two	phases	of	inner

radiance	of	the	ground	and	path	that	arise	during	the	intermediate	state	of	the
time	of	death	(
’chi-kha’i	bar-do
).
37
	
Tib.	
Chos-nyid	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod	chen-mo
.
38
	
For	a	synopsis	of	the	classical	enumeration	of	the	six	categories	of
intermediate	state:	namely	the	intermediate	state	of	the	living	or	natural
existence	(
rang-bzhin	skye-gnas-kyi	bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	dreams
(
rmi-lam	bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	meditative	stability	(
ting-nge-’dzin
bsam-gtan-gyi	bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	(
’chi-kha’i
bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	(
chos-nyid	bar-do
);	and	the	intermediate
state	of	consequent	rebirth	(
lugs-’byung	srid-pa’i	bar-do
),	see	glossary.	Tsele
Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	75-102,	also	discusses	the
diverse	interpretations	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	presented	by	the
different	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.
39
	
As	stated	above,	p.	229,	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	is	said	to
last	up	to	three	and	a	half	days,	so	that	those	who	have	failed	to	recognise	the
inner	radiances	of	the	ground	and	path	remain	unconscious	for	the	same	period
of	time.	It	is	on	being	aroused	from	that	unconscious	state	that	the	visions	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	then	arise.	It	is
important	to	bear	in	mind	that	the	use	of	the	word	‘day’	in	this	context	and	those
which	follow	is	from	the	standpoint	of	the	bereaved.	From	the	perspective	of	the
deceased,	as	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdol	states,	‘Few	people,	however,	consider	these
to	be	actual	solar	days.	Since	they	are	.	.	.	only	meditation	days,	understand	that
for	ordinary	people	they	do	not	appear	for	more	than	a	short	moment’	(
Mirror	of
Mindfulness
,	p.	113).
40
	
On	the	reversal	of	cyclic	existence	and	of	all	its	aspects	of	mundane
consciousness	and	sense-perception	through	the	practices	of	the	Great
Perfection,	see	NSTB,	p.	340,	and	GGFTC,	pp.	395-97,	1001-5.
41
	
The	events	which	unfold	in	the	course	of	the	intermediate	states	of	reality	and
rebirth	are	held,	in	the	view	of	the	present	text,	to	endure	approximately	for
forty-nine	days.	Note	however	that	this	period	of	forty-nine	days	is	not	said	to	be
fixed.	See	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	p.	22.	It	is
recognised	that	the	nature	of	the	appearances	in	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
will	vary	according	to	the	meditative	tradition	followed.	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol
(ibid.,	pp.	98-100)	does	emphasise,	on	the	other	hand,	that	the	pure	psycho-
physical	aggregates,	elements,	sense-organs,	and	so	forth,	will	manifest	as

sounds,	lights	and	rays.
42
	
Tib.	
dbus-su	thig-le	brdal-ba’i	zhing-khams
.	An	epithet	of	the	Akaniṣṭha-
Ghanavyūha	realm	of	Vairocana	Buddha,	on	which	see	glossary.
43
	
Tib.	
de-bzhin	gshegs-pa’i	’od-zer	chos-dbyings-kyi	ye-shes	zhes-bya-ba
.	This
luminosity	is	called	the	‘light	ray	of	the	Tathāgata’	because	Vairocana	Buddha	is
said	to	preside	over	the	Tathāgata	or	Buddha	family.	On	the	compassionate
unfolding	of	the	great	light	rays	of	the	tathāgatas,	see	also	Dudjom	Rinpoche,
NSTB,	pp.	912-13.
44
	
Note	that	the