o	 me!	 This	 outcaste	 butcher	 from
Tāmradv
ῑ
pa	 has	 committed	 evil	 deeds	 owing	 to	 his	 delusion	 and	 blinding
ignorance,	as	a	result	of	which	he	did	not	understand	[the	difference	between]
good	and	bad	actions.	Since	he	did	not	act	knowingly	or	with	understanding,	I
therefore	petition	you	not	to	punish	him.	He	has,	after	all,	also	carried	out	a

small	number	of	virtuous	actions!
Once	when	six	people	were	unable	to	escape	from	the	current	of	a	broad	river,
he	saved	all	six	-	with	a	virtuous	intent.	As	a	mark	of	this,	I	have	six	white
pebbles.	And	since	there	are	also	other	virtuous	actions,	similar	to	this,	which	he
has	incidentally	accumulated,	Great	Dharmarāja,	I	request	your	forgiveness	on
his	behalf.	(
As	he	says	this,	he	prostrates	three	times	[before	Dharmarāja]
	
.)
THE	BLACK	DEMON	[REPRESENTING	THE	BAD	CONSCIENCE]:	HA,
HA!	Is	this	all	you	have	to	say,	white	deity	[of	good	conscience]!	Are	you	not
embarrassed	to	carry	this	[almost]	empty	bowl!	He,	this	low-caste	butcher,	has
spent	his	life	in	evil	deeds	and	has	robbed	himself	of	his	share	of	virtue.
	
He	has	slain	all	the	animals	he	has	ever	seen.
He	has	taken	warm	flesh	for	food,
And	he	has	drunk	warm	blood	as	a	beverage.
He	has	continuously	spoken	harshly	[towards	others].
In	the	upper	valleys	he	has	slain	innocent	wildlife;
In	the	lower	valleys	he	has	slain	innocent	fish;
And	in	between	he	has	beaten	innocent	beggars.
He	has	defamed	each	and	every	spiritual	teacher,
Burnt	down	a	large	temple,
Polluted	a	great	lake	with	poison,
Burnt	a	vast	mountain	forest,
Beaten	his	parents,	and	destroyed	a	sacred	reliquary.
Now	in	Tāmradv
ῑ
pa,	India,
There	is	no	greater	wrongdoer	than	he!
Look	at	the	mound	of	black	pebbles!
(
turning	to	Lakṣanāraka
)
In	case	you	don’t	recognise	yourself,
Your	country	is	Tāmralipti,	India,
21
And	your	city	is	Śāntikāla.
Your	father	is	the	butcher,	Tripon,
22
Who	came	here	eight	years	ago.
Your	mother	is	the	butcheress,	Pelkyi,
23
Who	came	here	five	years	ago.
You	are	the	offspring	of	these	outcaste	butchers.
Now	you	have	come	here	-	haven’t	you?

The	year	is	the	Water	Female	Pig,
24
And	this	year	your	feeding	[in	the	human	world]	has	come	to	an	end.
All	those	of	eastern	India
Call	you	‘Red-handed	Butcher’;
All	those	of	southern	India
Call	you	the	‘wrongdoing	Lakṣanāraka’;
All	those	of	western	India
Call	you	‘Black	Low-caste	Butcher’;
All	those	of	northern	India
Call	you	the	‘Black	Killer	of	All’.
Your	caste	is	the	black	
caṇḍāla
	caste
And	your	family	line	is	that	of	wrongdoing	butchers.
All	generations	of	your	family	without	exception
Will	take	the	path	to	hell.
When	you	were	killing,	you	seemed	happy;
When	you	ate,	it	seemed	tasty,
But	does	it	taste	so	good	now?
What	use	is	your	clever,	slick-talking	tongue	[now]?
Now	the	time	has	come	for	you	to	experience	suffering,
In	retribution	for	the	million	animal	lives	[you	have	taken].
If	you	don’t	experience	this	suffering,
Then	millions	of	creatures	will	have	lost	everything,
And	you,	Lakṣanāraka,	will	have	gained	everything.
As	far	as	retribution	for	your	crimes	is	concerned,
Even	Dharmarāja	with	his	mighty	stature
Cannot	stop	the	effects	of	your	negative	actions,
The	greatest	of	which	was	burning	down	the	temple,
And	the	smallest	of	which	was	the	killing	of	lice.
This	is	why	you	have	accumulated	[all]	these	[black]	pebbles.
So	it	is	best	if	you	prepare	yourself	to	move	on.
[Get	ready	to]	go	swiftly	on	this	black	path!
[There],	the	sealed	copper	cauldron	[that	awaits	you]	is	wide	and	deep,
The	waves	of	boiling	bronze	are	fierce,
The	fiery	mass	of	past	actions	is	intensely	hot,
And	the	messengers	of	Yama	have	scant	mercy.
Dharmarāja’s	attitude	is	extremely	fierce,
The	weapons	of	past	actions	are	sharply	pointed,

And	the	black	winds	of	past	actions	are	very	powerful.
Now	is	the	time	for	you	to	go	to	such	a	place!
Though	I	really	do	have	compassion	for	you,
I	am	nonetheless	very,	very	satisfied!
You	must	carry	on	your	back	the	weight	and	measure,
Which	you	used	as	a	fraudulent	weight	and	meas