ever	weak	their	[individual]	ability	may	be.	Yet,	even
after	being	given	this	introduction	many	times,	there	are	some	whose	positive
opportunities	have	been	exhausted	by,	for	example,	their	great	negativity	or
through	not	
having	maintained	their	commitments	and	so	forth,	who,	even	now,

will	not	have	accepted	this	introduction.	These	individuals	will	have	turned	away
in	fear	of	both	the	sounds	and	the	luminosities	and	become	agitated	by	desire
and	negative	obscuration.	So	it	is	that,	on	the	fourth	day,	the	transcendent	lord
Amitābha’s	assembly	of	deities	will	come	to	escort	them	and,	at	that	same	time,
the	 light	 path	 [indicative	 of	 the	 realm]	 of	 the	 anguished	 spirits,	 which	 is
generated	by	desire	and	miserliness,	will	emerge.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	fourth	day,	the
purity	of	the	element	fire	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	red	light.	At	that	time,	from
the	red	western	Buddha	field	of	the	Blissful
	(
Sukhāvat
ῑ
)
,	the	transcendent	lord
Amitābha	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	red	in	colour,	holding	in	his	[right]
hand	a	lotus	flower,	seated	on	a	peacock	throne	and	embraced	by	the	supreme
consort	 Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ.
	 They	 are	 encircled	 by	 two	 male	 bodhisattvas,
Avalokiteśvara	and	Mañjuśr
ῑ
,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,	G
ῑ
tā	and	Ālokā,
thus,	six	 buddha-bodies	 will	be	 shining	 before	you	 from	within	a	 space	 of
rainbow	light.
A	red	light	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment,	which	is	the
natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	perceptions,	red	and	dazzling,	adorned	by
greater	and	lesser	seminal	points,	radiant	and	clear,	bright	and	dazzling,	[will
emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Amitābha	and	his	consort	and	will	shine	piercingly
before	you	at	the	level	of	your	heart	[with	such	brilliance]	that	your	eyes	cannot
bear	it.	Do	not	be	afraid!	Together	with	the	light	of	pristine	cognition,	a	dull
yellow	light,	[indicative	of	the	realm]	of	anguished	spirits,	will	also	dawn	before
you	[and	touch	your	heart].	Do	not	delight	[in	the	dull	yellow	light]!	Do	not
become	attached	to	it	and	do	not	cling	to	it!	At	this	time,	under	the	sway	of	deep
desire,	you	will	[wish	to]	turn	away	in	terror	from	the	bright	red	light	and	you
will	come	to	delight	in	the	dull	yellow	light	of	the	anguished	spirits	and	feel
attachment	towards	it.	At	this	moment,	abandon	your	fear,	and	recognise	the	red
light,	bright	and	dazzling,	radiant	and	clear,	to	be	pristine	cognition.	Let	your
awareness	relax	and	abide	directly	within	it,	resting	in	a	state	of	non-activity.
Have	confidence	in	the	radiant,	red	luminosity!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing
devotion.	If	you	recognise	this	radiance	as	the	natural	luminosity	
of	your	own
awareness,	even	though	you	may	feel	no	devotion	towards	it	and	have	not	recited
the	 aspirational	 prayer,	 all	 the	 buddha-bodies	 and	 light	 rays	 will	 dissolve
inseparably	[into	you]	and	you	will	attain	buddhahood.	If	you	are	not	able	to

recognise	[the	radiance]	in	this	way,	then	pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is
the	light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge	in	it.’
This	truly	is	the	light-ray	hook	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha’s	compassion!
Be	devoted	to	it!	Do	not	turn	away!	Should	you	turn	away,	the	luminosity	will
accompany	you	inseparably.	Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	attached	to	the	dull
yellow	light	of	the	anguished	spirits!	This	is	the	inviting	path	created	by	your
own	 habitual	 tendencies	 for	 deep-seated	 desire,	 which	 you	 yourself	 have
generated.	If	you	become	attached	to	this	[dull	light],	you	will	fall	down	into	the
realm	of	the	anguished	spirits	and	you	will	experience	unbearable	sufferings	of
hunger	and	thirst.	This	[dull	light]	is	an	obstacle	blocking	the	path	to	liberation!
Do	not	be	attached	to	it!	Abandon	your	attachment!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be
devoted	to	the	red	light,	which	is	radiant	and	dazzling,	and	focus	intently	and
si