gan
transcribing	and	collating	the	various	texts	associated	with	Karma	Lingpa’s
cycle.	It	is	clear	from	the	various	extant	lineage	prayers	that	he	was	directly
responsible	for	standardising	the	shorter	anthology	entitled	
The	Great	Liberation
by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
	in	its	present	form.
Rigdzin	Nyima	Drakpa’s	lineage	was	particularly	influential	in	the	nomadic
areas	of	Sok	Dzong,	where	the	mantrins	of	the	Kabgye	Lhakhang	even	now
maintain	 the	 lineage	 of	 his	 teachings,	 and	 in	 Dzachuka,	 where	 his	 teacher
Dzogchen	Pema	Rikdzin	founded	Dzogchen	Monastery	in	1685.	He	also	formed
a	spiritual	rapport	with	Terdak	Lingpa,	on	account	of	which	the	transmissions	of
Tsele,	Lhalung	and	Mindroling	all	converged	in	his	own	son	Orgyan	Tendzin.
Subsequently,	the	teachings	of	the	Karma	Lingpa	tradition	were	passed	on	from
Mindroling	to	Dzogchen	in	the	following	line	of	transmission:	Pema	Gyurme
Gyatso,	 Gyelse	 Ratna	 Vija,	 Dzogchen	 II	 Gyurme	 Thekchok	 Tendzin,	 Pema
Kundrol	Namgyel	and	Dzogchen	III	Ngedon	Tendzin	Zangpo.	The	last	named
was	 responsible	 for	 preparing	 the	 first	 xylographic	 edition	 of	
The	 Great
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	at	Dzogchen	Monastery	in	the
mid-eighteenth	century.
EDITIONS	AND	CONTENT	OF	
THE	GREAT	LIBERATION	BY
HEARING	IN	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATES
The	diverse	strands	of	the	lineage	stemming	from	Karma	Lingpa	and	Gyarawa,
summarised	above,	ensured	that	their	legacy	would	flourish	throughout	Tibet
and	in	the	neighbouring	sub-Himalayan	regions	of	Northern	Nepal,	Sikkim	and
Bhutan.	The	earliest	texts	which	these	spiritual	successions	imparted	through	the

generations	were	handwritten	manuscripts,	including	a	great	many	local	and
anonymous	supplements.	Yet,	as	Bryan	Cuevas	has	rightly	observed,	‘most	of
the	available	recensions	of	[Karma	Lingpa’s]	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
come	to	us	in	the	form	of	xylographic	prints	and	facsimile	reproductions	from
blocks	carved	only	in	the	last	two	centuries’.	Unfortunately,	the	scribal	errors
that	have	crept	into	many	of	these	‘standard’	editions	subsequently	acquired
great	currency.
At	present,	the	most	extensive	extant	version	of	the	
Peace	ful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
	is	not	a	block-print,	but	the
manuscript	version	from	the	library	of	the	late	
Kyabje
	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	who	in
the	1960s	had	his	scribe	prepare	an	elegant	three-volume	edition	on	the	basis	of
the	two	volumes	in	his	possession,	which	were	apparently	of	Katok	provenance.
This	 manuscript	 contains	 sixty-four	 distinct	 texts,	 which	 are	 arranged
sequentially	under	the	categories	of	history,	empowerment,	generation	stage,
perfection	stage,	introductions	(according	to	the	Great	Perfection),	path	of	skilful
means,	 and	 protector	 liturgies.	 Although	 it	 is	 the	 most	 extensive	 version
available,	this	manuscript	is	by	no	means	exhaustive	—	for	there	are	other,
smaller	published	compilations,	associated	with	Pelyul,	Dzogchen	and	Nedo,
containing	texts	that	are	excluded	from	the	larger	anthology.	However,	in	our
experience,	and	on	the	authority	of	Gene	Smith,	who	generously	made	the
Dudjom	manuscript	available	on	CD-ROM,	the	Dudjom	manuscript	is	far	more
accurate	than	the	many	Indian	and	Bhutanese	reprints	that	are	more	widely
available	and	have	provided	the	source	for	the	recent	partial	translations	of	
The
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
.	Even	the	illuminated
manuscript	on	which	Kazi	
Dawa	Samdup’s	1927	translation	is	based	appears	to
perpetuate	the	same	inaccuracies.	After	wrestling	with	the	scribal	errors,	lacunae
and	inconsistencies	that	fill	the	various	Indian	reprints	of	
The	Great	Liberation
by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	it	was	with	considerable	joy	and	relief
that	 we	 were	 finally	 able	 to	 clarify	 obscure	 readings	 and	 eliminate	 many
cumbersome	and	unnecessary	annotations	by	basing	our	translation	on	the	three-
volume	 Dudjom	 edition	 of	 the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathfu