can	see	a	basic	pattern	of
emergence	and	dissolution	which	is	common	to	both	animate	and	inanimate
phenomena.	Among	inanimate	phenomena	the	processes	of	arising	start	from	the
very	subtle	and	develop	into	the	more	gross.	That	is:	there	is	an	emergence	from
empty	space,	and	a	progression	to	movement	or	energy,	to	heat	or	light,	to
moisture	or	liquidity,	and	finally	to	solidity.	The	dissolution	is	the	reverse	of	this
sequence.	This	process	of	arising	and	dissolution	also	occurs	in	the	body.	In
tantra,	the	process	of	dissolution	of	the	physical	elements	which	constitute	a
human	body	is	described	as	beginning	first	with	the	dissolution	of	the	earth
element,	followed	by	the	water	element,	the	fire	element,	the	wind	element	and,
finally,	at	the	point	at	which	only	the	space	element	is	prominent,	all	the	gross
levels	of	energy	and	consciousness	have	dissolved.	Then,	in	a	further	series	of
dissolutions,	this	stage	gives	rise	to	the	experiences	which	are	called:	‘whitish
appearance’,	 followed	 by	 ‘reddish	 increased	 appearance’,	 ‘blackish	 near
attainment’	and	finally	there	is	a	culmination	in	the	full	experience	of	inner
radiance	called	‘the	attainment’.
d
Because	the	stages	of	dissolution	are	natural	processes,	imagining	these	is	of
pre-eminent	 importance	 in	 the	 generation-stage	 practices	 of	 visualising	 the
meditational	deity.
Both	 in	 the	 New	 and	 Old	 Translation	 schools,	 the	 actualisation	 of	 inner
radiance,	the	point	at	which	all	our	gross	consciousnesses	and	energies	have
been	dissolved,	is	the	primary	intent.	This	is	the	essence	of	the	Great	Perfection
(Dzogchen)	practices
e
	of	the	Nyingma	tradition,	of	the	Union	of	Emptiness	and
Luminosity	Based	on	the	Sameness	of	Saṃsāra	and	Nirvāṇa	practices	of	the
Sakya	tradition,	of	the	Great	Seal	(
Mahāmudrā
)	practices	of	the	Kagyu	tradition
and	 the	 Indivisible	 Union	 of	 Bliss	 and	 Emptiness	 practices	 of	 the	 Gelug
tradition.
Now,	when	we	speak	of	inner	radiance,	it	is	important	to	bear	in	mind	that
there	are	different	levels	at	which	this	can	be	experienced	
and,	in	addition,	there
is	one	important	difference	between	the	Dzogchen	view	of	inner	radiance	and
that	of	the	New	Translation	schools.	As	with	that	of	emptiness,	the	experience	of
inner	 radiance	 can	 be	 of	 different	 types.	 The	 experience	 of	 inner	 radiance
described	in	the	New	Translation	schools	is	effected	only	subsequent	to	the
dissolution	of	all	the	gross	levels	of	conceptual	elaboration.	However,	in	the
Dzogchen	view,	all	states	of	awareness	or	consciousness	are	thought	to	be
pervaded	by	inner	radiance,	just	as	a	sesame	seed	is	permeated	by	oil.	Therefore,

in	Dzogchen,	there	exist	refined	instructions	which	allow	the	recognition	of
inner	radiance	even	while	all	the	gross	levels	of	sensory	activity	are	still	active.
This	is	where	we	come	to	the	important	distinction	made	in	the	Dzogchen
teachings	between	the	Tibetan	terms	‘
sems
’	and	‘
rig-pa
’.	Our	‘ordinary	mind’
(
sems
)	refers	to	the	gross	dualising	consciousness	(
rnam-shes
),	whereas	‘pure
awareness’	(
rig-pa
)	is	free	from	the	dualistic	perceptions	of	subject	and	object.
Following	the	practices	of	the	Dzogchen	teachings	of	the	Nyingma	school	the
student	is	directly	introduced	by	an	authentic	spiritual	teacher	to	the	very	nature
of	his	or	her	mind	as	pure	awareness.	This	is	the	focus	of	the	‘Cutting	through
Resistance’	(
khregs-chod
)	aspect	of	the	Dzogchen	path	and	this	is	complemented
by	the	All-surpassing	Realisation	(
thod-rgal
)	practices	which	focus	on	eliciting
and	 recognising	 the	 radiances	 of	 pristine	 cognition.
f
	 Irrespective	 of	 these
differences	 of	 view	 and	 practice,	 however,	 a	 genuine	 experience	 of	 inner
radiance	is	the	realisation	of	the	fundamental	nature	of	our	awareness,	which	is
the	inextricable	union	of	emptiness	and	luminosity.
Now,	when	the	subtle	mind	is	completely	pure,	the	body	or	energy	aspect	of
the	combination	of	subtle	mind	and	subtle	body	arises	as	the	five	different
coloured	luminosit