ving,	poetic	beauty	of	the	original	work.	In
order	to	do	this,	as	is	described	in	the	Acknowledgements,	the	translation	has
been	 based	 on	 the	 oral	 commentarial	 explanation	 of	 contemporary	 lineage
holders	and	was	carried	out	with	the	continuous	advice	of	contemporary	masters.
Given	the	above,	there	is	very	little	to	say	with	respect	to	offering	further
introduction	to	the	meaning	of	the	texts.	It	is	our	hope	that	with	the	help	of	HH
the	Dalai	Lama’s	Introductory	Commentary,	the	short	introductions	to	each
chapter,	the	notes	and	the	glossary,	the	meaning	will	shine	through	as	directly	as
was	intended.
As	 I	 have	 been	 asked	 to	 do	 so,	 I	 will	 just	 say	 a	 few	 words	 about	 the
psychological	context	of	this	material.	It	may	seem	somewhat	woolly	to	many	if
it	is	said	that	the	insights	that	are	presented	here	come	from	those	who	have
realised	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	and	thereby	have	experiential	understanding
of	 the	 processes	 of	 the	 mind	 in	 deep	 sleep,	 dreams,	 the	 waking	 state	 and
throughout	the	processes	of	dying	and	beyond.	But,	as	described	by	the	Dalai
Lama	 in	 the	 Introductory	 Commentary,	 the	 process	 of	 imagining	
and	 then
actualising	the	stages	of	dissolution	of	consciousness	that	will	occur	naturally	at
the	 time	 of	 death	 lies	 at	 the	 heart	 of	 higher	 Tibetan	 Buddhist	 meditative
practices,	as	do	practices	related	to	maintaining	awareness	during	deep	sleep	and
while	dreaming.
As	 Gyurme	 Dorje	 describes	 in	 ‘A	 Brief	 Literary	 History’,	 this	 cycle	 of
teachings	is	based	on	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
.	This	text	is	described	as	having
been	 received	 in	 a	 revelation	 from	 the	 primordial	 buddha	 Samantabhadra,
transmitted	 through	 the	 agency	 of	 the	 meditational	 deities	 Vajrasattva	 and
Guhyapati	Vajrapāṇi.	In	other	words,	the	source	is	Samantabhadra,	who	is	the
resonance	 of	 pure	 awareness,	 the	 natural	 purity	 of	 mental	 consciousness,
transmitted	 through	 an	 embodiment	 of	 the	 insight,	 compassion	 and

communicative	skills	(skilful	means)	of	all	the	buddhas,	that	is	to	say	of	all	those
who	abide	in	an	unmoving	realisation	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind.
As	 in	 all	 the	 major	 Buddhist	 tantric	 systems,	 the	
Guhyagarbha	 Tantra
describes	a	maṇḍala,	which	is	a	visual	representation	of	the	components	of	the
enlightened	mind.	Our	chart	of	the	maṇḍala	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
(Appendix	Two)	sets	out	the	core	aspects	of	the	symbolism	of	the	maṇḍala
associated	with	our	text.	As	is	always	the	case,	this	symbolism	is	based	on	the
classical	understanding	of	the	nature	of	a	person’s	psycho-physical	components,
as	described	in	the	Abhidharma	literature,	which	is	common	to	all	forms	of
Buddhism.	This	analysis	of	the	components	of	our	being	can	be	undertaken	with
our	normal	conceptual	mind.
The	actual	experience	of	the	luminosities	which	are	said	to	underlie	the
maṇḍala	is	however	only	possible	as	a	result	of	the	accomplishment	of	very
subtle	meditative	states,	which	are	fruitional	aspects	of	the	path	of	Highest	Yoga
Tantra.	As	the	Dalai	Lama	relates	in	his	commentary,	these	luminosities	only
become	apparent	to	the	meditator	once	realisation	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind
is	 achieved.	 This	 occurs	 during	 the	 processes	 of	 meditations,	 which	 are
simulacra	of	the	processes	of	dying	and	the	re-emergence	of	consciousness	from
a	non-conceptual	inner	radiance,	the	mind’s	ultimate	nature.	The	processes	of	the
dissolution	of	the	coarse	forms	of	consciousness	into	inner	radiance	and	the
emergence	of	consciousness	from	inner	radiance	also	occur	naturally	at	the	time
of	death.	In	other	words,	according	to	Buddhist	tradition,	experiential	access	to
the	 processes,	 which	 mirror	 those	
of	 dying	 and	 the	 re-emergence	 of
consciousness	after	death,	is	achievable	in	the	waking	state.
When	HH	Dilgo	Khyenste	Rinpoche	gave	his	commentary	to	the	text	he
explained	that	the	‘Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Reality’,	the	central
section	of	‘The	Great