the	victims	of	bewilderment.
For,	however	learned	and	knowledgeable	in	explaining	the	nine	vehicles	they
may	be,
They	will	be	like	those	who	spread	fabulous	tales	of	remote	[places]	they	have
never	seen,
And	as	far	as	the	attainment	of	buddhahood	is	concerned,
They	will	not	approach	it,	even	for	an	instant.
	
If	this	nature	[of	intrinsic	awareness]	is	understood,
Virtuous	and	negative	acts	will	be	liberated,	right	where	they	are.
But	if	this	[single	nature]	is	not	understood,
One	will	amass	nothing	but	[future	lives	within]	cyclic	existence,	with	its
higher	and	lower	realms,
Regardless	of	whether	one	has	engaged	in	virtuous	or	non-virtuous	actions.

Yet,	if	one’s	own	mind	is	simply	understood	to	be	pristine	cognition,	[utterly]
empty	[of	inherent	existence],
The	consequences	of	virtuous	and	negative	actions	will	never	come	to	fruition
—
For	just	as	a	spring	cannot	materialise	in	empty	space,
Within	[the	realisation	of]	emptiness,	virtuous	and	negative	actions	do	not
objectively	exist.
20
	
So	it	is	that,	for	the	purpose	of	nakedly	perceiving	the	manifestly	present
intrinsic	awareness,
This	
Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
	is	most	profound.
Thus,	[by	following	this	instruction],	one	should	familiarise	oneself	with	this
intrinsic	awareness.
	
Profoundly	Sealed!
	
E-MA!
This	
Introduction	to	Awareness:	Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
Has	been	composed	for	the	sake	of	future	generations,	the	sentient	beings	of	a
degenerate	age.
[It	integrates]	in	a	purposeful	concise	abridgement,
All	my	preferred	tantras,	transmissions	and	esoteric	instructions.
Though	I	have	disseminated	it	at	this	present	time,
It	will	be	concealed	as	a	precious	treasure.
May	it	be	encountered	by	those	of	the	future,
Who	have	a	[positive]	inheritance	of	past	actions.
21
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
This	treatise	concerning	the	direct	introduction	to	awareness,	entitled	
Natural
Liberation	 through	 Naked	 Perception
,	 was	 composed	 by	 Padmākara,	 the
preceptor	of	Oḍḍiyāna.	May	[its	influence]	not	be	ended	until	cyclic	existence
has	been	emptied.

5
The	Spiritual	Practice	entitled	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual
Tendencies
CONTEXT
This	is	the	concise	‘generation	stage’	practice	associated	with	this	cycle
of	teachings.	Normally,	after	completing	the	preparatory	philosophical
studies	and	meditational	practices	over	many	years,	the	full	generation
stage	practice	entitled	
The	Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings
	
would	be	done
four	times	a	day	while	in	an	extended	solitary	retreat.	Following	this
retreat,	the	full	generation	stage	practice	should	be	done	at	least	monthly.
As	 a	 method	 for	 enhancing	 and	 sustaining	 an	 unbroken	 purity	 of
perception,	this	concise	practice,	
The	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual
Tendencies
,	should	be	done	three	times	a	day,	in	the	morning,	at	midday
and	 in	 the	 evening,	 throughout	 the	 practitioner’s	 life.	 If	 this	 is	 not
practical,	then	the	concise	practice	should	be	done	twice	a	day,	in	the
morning	and	evening,	or	at	least	once	a	day	in	the	morning,	following	the
Preliminary	Practice
	(Chapter	1).
The	aim	is	to	provide	a	means	by	which	the	practitioner	can	cultivate
an	unwavering	recognition	of	the	nature	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities	within	his	or	her	own	mind	and	body.	Thereby	recognition	of	the
natural	 purity	 of	 the	 practitioner’s	 impure	 habitual	 tendencies	 is
continuously	 developed.	 The	 measure	 of	 successful	 training	 is:	 the
location	 and	 nature	 of	 the	 deities	 will	 be	 remembered	 even	 in	 the
practitioner’s	dreams,	and,	the	arising	of	a	sustained	recognition	that	all
phenomena,	sounds	and	thoughts	are,	in	their	essence,	the	body,	speech
and	mind	of	the	deities.
Herein	 is	 contained	
The	 Spiritual	 Practice	 entitled	 Natural	 Liberation	 of
Habitual	Tendencies
,
1
	[which	is	an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through

[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention.
2
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	Sam