world	who	totally	lack
the	 propensities	 for	 spiritual	 practice,	 and	 those	 who	 have	 broken	 their
commitments	and	so	forth,	will	continue	to	be	bewildered,	as	a	result	of	their
[negative]	past	actions.	Despite	being	introduced,	they	will	continue	to	roam
downwards,	failing	to	achieve	recognition.
So	it	is,	that	on	the	seventh	day,	the	divine	assembly	of	the	Awareness	Holders
will	 arise	 from	 the	 pure	 realm	 of	 the	 sky-farers	 and	 come	 to	 escort	 [the
deceased],	as	will,	simultaneously,	the	light	path	to	the	animal	realm,	formed	of
the	dissonant	mental	state,	delusion.
55
At	this	time,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given
with	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	seventh	day,	a	five-
faceted	multicoloured	light,	[which	is	indicative	of]	the	purity	of	your	habitual
tendencies	in	the	expanse	[of	reality],	will	arise	before	you.	Simultaneously,	the

divine	assembly	of	the	awareness	holders,	arising	from	the	pure	realm	of	the	sky-
farers,	will	come	forward	to	escort	you.
In	 the	 centre	 of	 [this	 maṇḍala],	 suffused	 by	 rainbows	 and	 light,	 the
unsurpassed	 [Vidyādhara]	 known	 as	 the	 ‘awareness	 holder	 of	 maturation’,
Padmanarteśvara,	 will	 instantaneously	 arise,	 his	 body	 resplendent	 with	 the
radiance	of	the	five	lights,	embraced	by	his	consort,	a	red	ḍākin
ῑ
,	[who	is
dancing]	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised	in	the	gesture	of
pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	east	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	who	abides	on	the	levels’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	white	in
colour,	his	face	radiant	and	smiling.	He	is	embraced	by	his	consort,	a	white
ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is	dancing	with	a	
blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised	in	the
gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	south	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	with	power	over	the	lifespan’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	yellow
in	colour	and	adorned	by	the	exquisite	[eighty]	minor	marks.	He	is	embraced	by
his	consort,	a	yellow	ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is	dancing	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a
curved	knife,	raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	west	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	of	the	great	seal’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	red	in	colour,	his
face	radiant	and	smiling.	He	is	embraced	by	his	consort,	a	red	ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is
dancing	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised	in	the	gesture	of
pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	north	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	of	spontaneous	presence’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	green	in
colour,	his	face	both	wrathful	and	smiling.	He	is	embraced	by	his	consort,	a
green	ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is	dancing	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised
in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
Encircling	 these	 awareness	 holders,	 there	 will	 be	 inestimable	 crowds	 of
ḍākin
ῑ
s:	the	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	eight	charnel	grounds,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	four	enlightened
families,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	three	abodes,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	ten	directions,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the
twenty-four	power-places,	spiritual	heroes	and	heroines,	faithful	retainers,
56
and	protectors	of	the	[sacred]	teachings	-	all	wearing	the	six	kinds	of	bone
ornaments,	playing	drums,	thigh-bone	trumpets,	and	skull	drums	and	[waving]
banners	made	of	the	hide	of	‘ritually	liberated’	beings,	canopies	and	streamers
of	human	hide,	[the	entire	display	pervaded	by]	an	incense	cloud	of	burning
human	flesh,	reverberating	with	the	sound	of	countless	and	diverse	musical

instruments,	the	sound	permeating	all	world	systems,	causing	them	to	vibrate,
tremble	and	quake.	The	crescendo	will	reverberate	as	if	to	split	your	head.
Performing	their	diverse	dances,	this	[array]	will	come	to	escort	those	who	have
kept	their	commitments	and	to	bring	to	account	those	who	have	allowed	their
commitments	to	degenerate.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	a	five-coloured