and	 those	 who	 have	 an	 excellent
inheritance	 of	 past	 actions,	 it	 is	 difficult	 for	 those	 lacking	 familiarity	 with
meditative	experience	and	those	with	a	negative	disposition	to	attain	recognition,
on	account	of	the	fear	and	terror	[induced	by]	negative	past	actions.	Therefore,
from	the	tenth	day	onwards,	these	individuals	should	once	again	be	reminded	[of
the	nature	of	this	intermediate	state],	through	the	following	words.	As	before,
offerings	should	be	made	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels,	and	the	
Aspirational
Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
	should	be
repeated.
2
	Then,	one	should	read	aloud	the	following,	three	or	up	to	seven	times,
calling	to	the	deceased	by	name:
	

O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	carefully	and	understand!	Hell-beings,	gods
and	those	with	the	body	of	the	intermediate	state	are	born	in	a	supernormal
manner.	Formerly,	when	the	visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arose
before	you	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	-	you	did	not	recognise	them.
Then,	overwhelmed	by	terror,	you	would	have	fainted.	Four	and	a	half	days	later,
upon	awakening	from	this	faint,	your	consciousness	has	again	become	clear	and
a	body,	resembling	your	former	one,	has	arisen.	This	[‘body’]	is	described	in	the
tantras:
3
	
Having	the	bodily	form	of	one’s	past	and	emergent	existences,
Complete	with	all	sense-faculties,	and	the	power	of	unobstructed	movement.
Endowed	with	miraculous	abilities	derived	from	past	actions,
Visible	to	those	similar	in	kind	and	through	pure	clairvoyance.
	
Here,	‘past	and	emergent’
4
	
means	that	your	[present]	body	[which	is	a	product
of]	your	past	habitual	tendencies	will	resemble	a	body	of	flesh	and	blood,	but,
like	a	body	of	the	Auspicious	Aeon
	
(
bhadrakalpa
)	
it	will	also	be	radiant	and
possess	 certain	 of	 the	 major	 and	 minor	 marks.	 Since	 this	 [state]	 is	 an
apparitional	experience	of	the	mental	body,	it	is	called	‘the	mental	body	of
apparitional	experience	in	the	intermediate	state’.
5
	
At	this	time,	if	you	are	to	be
born	as	a	god,	you	will	come	to	experience	the	apparitional	field	of	the	realm	of
the	gods.	Depending	on	whichever	of	the	realms	you	are	to	take	birth	in,	whether
that	of	the	antigods,	humans,	animals,	anguished	spirits	or	hell-beings,	you	will
come	to	experience	its	particular	apparitional	field.	Therefore,	‘past’	means	that
for	three	and	a	half	days	you	will	possess	the	bodily	form	[which	is	a	product]	of
your	past	habitual	tendencies	and	existences.	And	‘emergent’	means	that,	after
[three	and	a	half	days],	the	apparitional	field	of	the	next	realm	into	which	you
are	 to	 be	 born,	 will	 ‘emerge’.	 Hence,	 the	 expression	 ‘past	 and	 emergent’
[existences].
Whatever	apparitional	fields	emerge	at	this	time,	do	not	be	drawn	by	them!
Do	not	become	attached	to	them!	Do	not	cling	to	them!	If	you	cling	to	them	and
become	attached,	you	will	continue	
to	roam	amongst	the	six	classes	[of	beings]
and	be	turning	towards	suffering.	Although,	until	yesterday,	the	intermediate
state	of	reality	arose	[within	you],	you	did	not	recognise	it.	As	a	result	you	have
been	compelled	to	wander	here.	Now,	just	as	was	[formerly]	introduced	by	your
spiritual	teacher,	if	you	are	able	to	cultivate,	undistractedly,	[a	recognition	of]

the	essential	nature	[of	reality],	if	you	can	rest	and	abide	without	grasping	and
without	activity,	directly,	in	the	unwavering,	naked	awareness,	which	is	radiance
and	emptiness	conjoined,	you	can	attain	liberation	and	avoid	wandering,	yet
further,	 towards	 the	 womb	 entrances.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 able	 to	 achieve	 this
recognition,	then	visualise	your	meditational	deity,	whichever	it	may	be,	or	your
spiritual	teacher,	as	being	[seated]	on	the	crown	of	your	head	and	be	intensely
and	fervently	devoted.	This	is	most	important.	Again	and	again,	do	not	be
distracted.
	
If	[the	deceased]	does	indeed	recognise	this	essential	nature	[of	reality],	he	or
she	will	attain	liberation	and	avoid	roaming	further	amongst	the	six