hful	Deities.	Thus,	the
supreme	and	common	accomplishments	will	be	attained	in	this	very	life;	and
after	one	has	died,	when	the	visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	dawn
during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,	one	will	dissolve	indivisibly	with	the
meditational	deities,	and	buddhahood	will	be	attained.
32
	Experientially	cultivate
this	[
Spiritual	Practice
]!	Do	not	forget	its	words	and	meanings	even	if	you	were
to	be	pursued	by	a	hundred	assassins.	Embrace	it!	Hold	it	[to	your	heart]!	Read	it
aloud!	Comprehend	it	in	its	entirety!	Keep	it	in	mind,	fully	and	accurately!
This	most	lucid	
Spiritual	Practice
,	which	is	a	coalescence	of	the	[full	means
of	accomplishment	of	the]	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	is	the	experiential

cultivation	 associated	 with	 the	
Liberation	 by	 Hearing	 in	 the	 Intermediate
States.
33
	It	is	the	essence	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	The	Ritual
Purification	entitled	Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings.
34
	It	is	a	supporting	text	to
the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Awareness:	Secret	Empowerment	of	the	Intermediate
States
,
35
	 and	 it	 is	 the	 main	 practice	 associated	 with	 the	
Reparation	 [of
Commitments]	and	Confession:	Natural	Liberation	of	Transgressions.
36
	It	is	the
path	of	liberation	followed	by	fortunate	beings.	May	[the	influence	of]	this
Spiritual	Practice:	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
	not	be	exhausted
until	cyclic	existence	has	been	emptied.
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya	dge’o

6
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through
[Enactment	of]	the	Hundredfold	Homage	to	the	Sacred
Enlightened	Families
CONTEXT
This	practice	reinforces	the	previous	meditation,	taking	the	form	of	a
physical	prostration	to	each	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	in	turn.
This	
Hundredfold	Homage
	can	be	done	on	its	own	or	immediately	after
the	practice	of	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
.	It	can	also
be	practised	whenever	feast-offerings	are	performed	in	conjunction	with
The	Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings
	or	whenever	the	practitioner	makes
offerings	of	incense,	flowers	and	butter-lamps	to	the	deities.
Practitioners	should	make	these	prostrations	while	clearly	visualising
before	 them	 the	 form	 of	 the	 deity,	 in	 perfect	 detail,	 and	 while
experientially	cultivating	the	deity’s	nature	and	the	inner	meaning	of	the
symbolism.	Also,	as	the	colophon	recommends,	the	practitioner	should
concurrently:	‘mentally	admit	and	feel	remorse	for	all	one’s	negativities
and	obscurations,	which	have	been,	are	being	and	will	be	accumulated.’
Herein	is	contained	an	ancillary	chapter	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
,
1
	entitled	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration
through	[Enactment	of]	the	Hundredfold	Homage
,
2
	[which	is	an	extract	from]
the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 A	 Profound	 Sacred	 Teaching,	 [entitled]
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
3
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra	and	Mahottara,
To	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,
And	to	the	assembly	of	the	hundred	sacred	enlightened	families.
Having	purified	all	negativity	and	obscurations,
May	I	act	so	as	to	guide	all	beings	to	the	pure	buddha	fields!

	
I	[now]	present	this	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through
[Enactment	 of	 the	 Hundredfold]	 Homage
,	 a	 method	 for	 performing	 a
hundredfold	homage	to	the	infinite	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	of	the	hundred
sacred	 enlightened	 families,	 by	 which	 negativity	 and	 obscuration	 may	 be
purified.	Cherish	your	zeal	in	this	[practice]	throughout	the	three	times!
	
NAMO!
4
I	bow	down	to
5
	Samantabhadra,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
Father	of	all	buddhas,	the	natural	purity	of	mental	consciousness,
The	primary	buddha,	unchanging	body	of	light,
Sky	[blue],	and	seated	in	the	posture	of	meditative	equipoise.
	
I	bow	down	to	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	supreme	consort,
Natural	purity	of	the	sensory	spectrum	of	phenomena,
6
Stainless	white,	like	crystal,
Mother