into
rainbow	light,	in	the	heart	of	the	divine	assembly	of	the	awareness	holders,	and
thereafter,	undoubtedly,	be	born	into	the	pure-realm	of	the	sky-farers.
	
All	types	of	spiritual	friend	can	attain	recognition	at	this	stage,	and	[thus]	they
will	 attain	 liberation.	 There	 is	 no	 doubt	 that	 even	 those	 with	 negative
propensities	can	attain	liberation	at	this	point.
This	 concludes	 the	 first	 part	 of	 the	
Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing
,	 the
introduction	to	inner	radiance	in	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	and
the	introduction	to	the	peaceful	deities	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.
	
ITI!	SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!

PART	TWO
An	Elucidation	of	the	Appearance	of	the	Wrathful	Deities	in	the
Intermediate	State	of	Reality
Herein	is	contained	
An	Elucidation	of	the	Arising	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	the
Wrathful	Deities.
1
INTRODUCTION
Now,	the	way	in	which	the	intermediate	state	of	the	wrathful	deities	arises
should	be	presented.	In	the	previous	intermediate	state	of	the	peaceful	deities
there	 were	 seven	 successive	 [critical	 or]	 dangerous	 pathways.	 By	 receiving
introduction	to	these	sequentially,	even	though	one	might	not	have	attained
recognition	at	one	[critical	pathway],	one	should	have	attained	recognition	at
another.	Those	who	have	achieved	liberation	[in	this	way]	are	countless.
Yet,	although	many	have	been	liberated	through	such	[introductions	to	the
nature	of	reality],	sentient	beings	are	numerous.	Evil	past	actions	are	very	potent.
Negative	obscurations	are	dense.	Habitual	tendencies	are	long	lasting.	The	cycle
of	 ignorance	 and	 bewilderment	 is	 inexhaustible	 and	 undiminishing.	 Despite
having	received	introduction	in	such	detail,	there	are	still	a	large	number	who
roam	downwards,	not	having	achieved	liberation.
Now,	after	the	invitation	of	the	assembly	of	the	peaceful	deities,	and	the	divine
assembly	of	the	awareness	holders	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	has	passed,	the	blazing	assembly
of	 the	 fifty-eight	 wrathful	 blood-drinking	 deities,	 who	 are	 a	 natural
transformation	 of	 the	 above	 assembly	 of	 peaceful	 deities,	 will	 arise.	 These
deities	will	be	very	dissimilar	[in	appearance]	to	the	peaceful	deities.	This	is	the
intermediate	state	of	the	wrathful	deities	and,	[consequently,	as	the	deceased	will
be]	overpowered	by	fear,	terror	or	awe,	recognition	also	becomes	more	difficult.
Uncontrollably,	awareness	continually	
faints.	But,	nevertheless,	if	there	is	even
the	slightest	recognition,	liberation	is	easy.	Should	you	ask	why	this	is	so	-	it	is
because	 once	 the	 awesome,	 terrifying	 and	 fearful	 appearances	 arise,	 the

awareness	 does	 not	 have	 the	 luxury	 of	 distraction.	 The	 awareness	 is	 one-
pointedly	concentrated.
If,	at	this	stage,	oral	instructions	such	as	those	which	follow	[have	not	been
previously	introduced,	or]	are	not	now	introduced,	even	though	one’s	studies
may	have	been	ocean-like,	they	will	be	of	no	benefit	here.	Even	the	preceptors
[of	monasteries]	who	uphold	the	monastic	disciplines	and	great	teachers	of
dialectics	[who	have	not	been	previously	introduced]	will	be	bewildered	on	this
occasion,	and	fail	to	attain	recognition.	Consequently,	they	will	continue	to	roam
in	cyclic	existence.	This	is	even	more	so	for	ordinary	persons:	fleeing	in	awe,
terror	and	fear,	they	will	fall	into	the	abyss	of	lower	existences	and	suffer
miserably.	However,	even	the	most	inferior	of	yogins	who	has	practised	the	way
of	secret	mantra,	will	immediately,	upon	seeing	the	assembled	blood-drinking
deities,	 recognise	 them	 to	 be	 meditational	 deities,	 as	 if	 meeting	 old
acquaintances.	Trusting	in	them,	the	yogin	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[into	the
meditational	deities]	and	attain	buddhahood.
The	crucial	point	is	indeed	that	those	in	this	world	who	have,	[prior	to	death],
meditated	on	the	formal	description	of	these	blood-drinking	buddha-bodies,	and
also	made	offerings	and	praises	to	them,	or,	at	the	very	least,	have	simply	seen
their	painted	and	sculpted	images,	may