n-like	relative	appearances,	we	should	err,
[We	acknowledge	this	and	seek	your	forgiveness.]
We	confess	that	we	have	deviated	from	the	buddha-mind!
If	we	have	committed	transgressions,	please	forgive	our	deviations.
	
Throughout	beginningless	time	and	throughout	the	limits	of	cyclic	existence,
We	have	roamed	within	these	turning	worlds	driven	on	by	the	forces	of
[ripening]	past	actions	—
[Endlessly]	drinking	the	poisons	of	dissonant	states	and	false	perspectives	on
reality.
May	The	One	Gone	to	Bliss,	king	among	compassionate	physicians,
Grant	the	medicine	of	liberation,	the	nectar	of	the	genuine	teachings,
To	those	[of	us]	who	are	severely	afflicted	by	the	[primal]	disease,	which	is
suffering!
May	all	the	diseases	caused	by	bewildering	dissonant	states	be	pacified!
May	we	be	sustained	in	the	nucleus	of	unsurpassed	enlightenment!
We	take	refuge	in	you,	O	compassionate	lord	of	loving	kindness!
We	confess	that	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind!

	
If	we	have	boasted	of	our	high	view	and	yet	not	understood	the	meaning	of
actual	reality,
If	 we	 have	 not	 clearly	 visualised	 the	 meditational	 deity,	 owing	 to	 our
meditations	being	excessively	brief,
Or	if	we	have	made	an	inadequate	number	of	recitations	or	spoken	these
defectively,
However	 we	 have	 deviated	 from	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the	 oceans	 of
conquerors,
We	confess	our	transgressions	in	the	presence	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Conquerors.
We	make	confession	to	you,	O	Compassionate	Ones!
We	make	confession	in	the	presence	of	the	entire	assembly	of	the	deities	of
pristine	cognition!
	
If	we	have	failed	to	please	our	spiritual	teacher,	on	account	of	the	feebleness
of	our	effort,
If	we	have	failed	to	be	well	regarded	by	our	spiritual	brothers	and	sisters,	on
account	of	the	feebleness	of	our	devotion,
If	we	have	divulged	the	oral	teachings	to	another,	on	account	of	our	flirtatious
intentions,
Indeed,	whatever	extravagances,	omissions,	deviations	or	mistakes	we	have
made,
With	respect	to	the	fundamental	commitments	of	buddha-body,	speech	and
mind,
Whilst	 swayed	 by	 the	 influence	 of	 ignorance,	 either	 consciously	 or
unconsciously,
We	 confess	 all	 such	 transgressions	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 Peaceful	 and
Wrathful	Conquerors.
We	make	confession	to	you,	O	Compassionate	Ones!
We	make	confession	to	the	oceanic	assembly	of	the	conquerors!
May	all	[the	degenerations]	that	we	now	confess	be	cleansed	and	purified!
Please	grant	us	the	purity	of	the	non-dual	truth!
SAMAYA!
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	PEACEFUL

DEITIES,	THE	EMBODIMENT	OF	[THE	QUIESCENT
NATURE	OF]	REALITY
The	initial	confession	is	that	to	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	father
and	mother	consorts
HŪṂ	We	pray	to	you,	father	and	mother,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
Mind	and	phenomena	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	father	and	mother,	in	union,
Due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this	to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind
Of	you,	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	father	and	mother,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Second	is	the	confession	to	the	five	male	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	families	of
the	conquerors
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	five	[male	buddhas]	of	the	enlightened	families	of	the
conquerors,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
The	five	psycho-physical	aggregates	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O	five	[male	buddhas]	of	the	enlightened	families	of	the	conquerors,
Due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this	to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind
Of	the	five	[male	buddhas	of	the]	enlightened	families	of	the	conquerors,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Third	is	the	confession	to	the	five	female	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	families
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	five	female	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	fa