ing!
How	 deluded	 we	 have	 been	 in	 clinging	 to	 the	 dichotomy	 of	 transitional
processes!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	the	three	times,	which	is
unchanging!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	cause	and	effect,
When	the	naturally	present	pristine	cognition	arises	effortlessly!
How	 deluded	 we	 have	 been	 in	 clinging	 to	 the	 dichotomy	 of	 effort	 and
attainment!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	naturally	present	expanse,	which

arises	without	effort!
	
How	pitiful	is	the	view	which	dualises	eternalism	and	nihilism,
When	the	pristine	cognition	of	[intrinsic]	awareness	is	free	from	eternalism
and	nihilism!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	existence	and	non-
existence!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	pristine	cognition,	which
is	beyond	eternalism	and	nihilism!
24
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	oscillates	between	biased	positions,
When	the	pure	expanse	of	reality	is	free	from	middle	and	extremes!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	middle	and
extremes!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	pure	expanse	of	reality,	which	is	free
from	a	middle	or	extremes!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	outside	and	inside,
When	the	celestial	palace	is	free	from	inner	and	outer	dimensions!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	spaciousness	and
confinement!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	[of	the	celestial	palace],
Which	is	free	from	the	duality	of	spaciousness	and	confinement,	or	of	inner
and	outer	dimensions!
	
How	pitiful	is	the	view	which	dualises	‘higher	and	lower’	[approaches],
When	the	sexual	centre	of	the	female	consort	is	free	from	[the	distinction
between]	higher	and	lower	[energy	centres]!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	between	higher	and
lower	[energy	centres]!
25
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	the	[consort’s]	secret
place,
26
Which	is	free	from	[the	distinction	between]	higher	and	lower!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	objects	and	mind,
When	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	is	free	from	individuated	distinctions!

How	 deluded	 we	 have	 been	 in	 clinging	 to	 the	 dichotomy	 between	 the
environment	and	its	inhabitants!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	[the	expanse	of]	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	which	is	unchanging!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	discriminates	between	individual	thoughts,
When	the	dynamic	of	the	male	consort	acts	unconstrictedly!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	mistakenly	to	nominalism!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	the	awareness	holders,
who	are	free	from	conceptual	thoughts!
	
Since	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic	awareness,	has	not	arisen	within	us,
How	pitiful	is	this	mind	obscured	by	ignorance,
Which	grasps	immaterial	phenomena	as	materially	substantive!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	natural	pristine	cognition!
Since	we	have	failed	to	understand	the	nature	of	uncreated	truth,
How	tormented	is	this	intellect	of	a	bewildered	being,
Which	apprehends	the	uncreated	truth	in	terms	of	‘I’	and	‘mine’!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
uncreated!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	mentally	elucidate	the	nature	of	reality,
We	have	not	understood	that	phenomenal	appearances	are	illusory,
And	thereby	our	minds	have	become	attached	to	material	wealth!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	uncreated	reality,	which	is	free	from
attachment!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	realise	that	cyclic	existence	is	free	from	inherent
existence,
We	have	grasped	at	the	self-existence	of	things	and	their	characteristics,
And	thereby	sought	happiness	through	non-virtuous	behaviour.
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	between	hope	and
doubt!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	enlightenment,	which	is
untainted!
	

Since	we	have	failed	to	understand	the	truth	of	sameness	with	true	equanimity,