the	Visual	Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
(Chapter	8),	just	before	the	person	passes	away,	the	lama	should	immediately
begin	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	(the	first	part
of	the	present	chapter),	even	if	the	previous	recitations	are	unfinished.	In	certain
circumstances,	mouth	to	mouth	resuscitation	might	be	given,	in	accordance	with
the	 cycle	 entitled	
Eight	 Transmitted	 Precepts:	 Oral	 Transmission	 of	 the
Awareness	Holder
	(
bKa’-brgyad	rig-’dzin	zhal-lung
),	which	was	revealed	by	the
Fifth	Dalai	Lama,	or	an	equivalent	text.	This	may	maintain	life	for	a	short	period
while	final	guidance	is	given.
Accordingly,	the	dying	one	should	be	guided	through	the	processes	of	the
dissolution	of	the	elements	(as	set	out	in	Chapter	8),	before	continuing	with	the
introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	as	set	out	in	this
chapter.	Usually,	the	dying	person	is	addressed	by	name,	or	by	the	expression
‘child	of	buddha	nature’	(
rigs-kyi	bu
).	One	who	is	worthy	of	great	respect	is
addressed	by	an	expression	such	as	‘venerable	one’,	‘spiritual	master’,	‘teacher’,
or	‘your	ladyship’	and	so	forth.	If	it	is	someone	from	whom	the	attending	lama
has	personally	received	teaching,	he	may	use	the	expression	‘lord	of	the	refuge’
(
skyabs-mgon
)	 or	 ‘great	 lama’	 (
bla-chen
),	 and	 so	 forth.	 There	 are	 different
modes	of	address.
The	voice	of	the	lama	who	calls	out	to	the	dying	person	should	be	very
melodious,	so	that	merely	upon	hearing	the	sound	of	the	instructions	the	person
feels	soothed,	elevated	and	attracted.
Following	the	outer	dissolution	of	the	four	elements	and	the	inner	dissolution
of	the	processes	of	conceptual	thought	into	redness,	whiteness	and	blackness,	the
lama	should	recite	the	verses	describing	
the	moment	of	the	arising	of	the	inner
radiance	of	the	ground.	These	words	of	introduction	should	be	read	aloud	three
times.	If	the	dying	person	fails	to	recognise	the	first	inner	radiance	and	swoons

into	unconsciousness,	the	lama	should	proceed	with	the	introduction	to	the
second	inner	radiance	followed	by	the	introduction	to	the	emergence	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.
Once	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	has	been	completed,
the	attending	lama	should	closely	observe	the	body	of	the	deceased	and	seek	to
determine	 whether	 he	 or	 she	 has	 attained	 liberation	 from	 rebirth	 in	 cyclic
existence.	If	emancipation	has	occurred,	the	body	will	take	on	a	certain	glow,
and	while	being	in	its	presence,	one	will	experience	a	sensation	of	happiness.
The	body	will	not	smell.	It	will	look	just	like	a	living	person	who	is	sleeping.
These	are	signs	that	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	has	attained	liberation.	In
addition,	external	environmental	signs	may	arise,	as	described	in	Chapter	8,
including	distinctive	cloud	formations	and	rainbows.	If	the	deceased	is	a	realised
yogin,	monk	or	layperson	who	has	gained	complete	freedom	at	the	time	of	death,
then	the	attending	lama	may	hear	the	sound	of	chanting	and	the	music	of	sacred
instruments,	 such	 as	 the	 skull	 drum	 or	 bell.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 if	 the
consciousness	of	the	deceased	has	not	been	emancipated,	the	complexion	of	the
deceased	will	become	disquieting	and	may	inspire	a	sense	of	fear	when	it	is
seen.	 The	 face	 will	 become	 grey	 and	 dusty,	 and	 the	 body	 will	 begin	 to
decompose	very	quickly.
If	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	does	not	attain	liberation	while	in	the
intermediate	state	of	reality,	the	mental	body	assumed	by	the	deceased	will	then
immediately	 fall	 into	 the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 rebirth,	 at	 which	 time,	 the
attending	lama	should	recite	the	introduction	to	that	phase,	as	presented	in	the
latter	part	of	this	chapter.
Importantly,	these	introductions	to	the	three	intermediate	states	of	the	time	of
death,	reality	and	rebirth	should	be	supplemented,	if	appropriate,	by	the	practice
of	the	transference	of	consciousness,	as	prese