to
introduce	to	you.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	that	which	is	called	death	has	now	arrived.	You
are	leaving	this	world.	But	in	this	you	are	not	alone.	This	happens	to	everyone.
Do	not	be	attached	to	this	life!	Do	not	cling	to	this	life!	Even	if	you	remain
attached	and	clinging,	you	do	not	have	the	power	to	stay	-	you	will	only	continue
to	roam	within	the	cycles	of	existence.	Therefore,	do	not	be	attached	and	do	not
cling!	Think	of	the	Three	Precious	Jewels!

O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 however	 terrifying	 the	 appearances	 of	 the
intermediate	state	of	reality	might	be,	do	not	forget	the	following	words.	Go
forward	remembering	their	meaning.	The	crucial	point	is	that	through	them
recognition	may	be	attained.
	
Alas,	now,	as	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	the	merest	thought	of	awe,	terror	or	fear,
I	will	recognise	all	that	arises	to	be	awareness,	manifesting	naturally	of	itself.
Knowing	such	[sounds,	lights	and	rays]	to	be	visionary	phenomena	of	the
intermediate	state,
At	this	moment,	having	reached	this	critical	point,
I	must	not	fear	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	which	manifest
naturally!
	
Go	forward,	reciting	these	words	distinctly	and	be	mindful	of	their	meaning.	Do
not	forget	them!	For	it	is	essential	to	recognise,	with	
certainty,	that	whatever
terrifying	experiences	may	arise,	they	are	natural	manifestations	[of	actual
reality].	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	when	your	mind	and	body	separate,	the
pure	[luminous]	apparitions	of	reality	itself,	will	arise:	subtle	and	clear,	radiant
and	dazzling,	naturally	bright	and	awesome,	shimmering	like	a	mirage	on	a
plain	in	summer.	Do	not	fear	them!	Do	not	be	terrified!	Do	not	be	awed!	They
are	the	natural	luminosities	of	your	own	actual	reality.	Therefore	recognise	them
[as	they	are]!
From	within	these	lights,	the	natural	sound	of	reality	will	resound,	clear	and
thunderous,	reverberating	like	a	thousand	simultaneous	peals	of	thunder.	This	is
the	natural	sound	of	your	own	actual	reality.	So,	do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be
terrified!	Do	not	be	awed!	The	body	that	you	now	have	is	called	a	‘mental	body’,
it	is	the	product	of	[subtle]	propensities	and	not	a	solid	corporeal	body	of	flesh
and	blood.	Therefore,	whatever	sounds,	lights	or	rays	may	arise,	they	cannot
harm	you.	For	you	are	beyond	death	now!	It	is	enough	that	you	simply	recognise
[the	sounds	and	luminosities]	to	be	manifestations	of	your	own	[actual	reality].
Know	that	this	is	the	intermediate	state!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	not	now	recognise	[these	phenomena]	to
be	 natural	 manifestations,	 whatever	 meditative	 practices	 you	 may	 have
undertaken	whilst	in	the	human	world,	if	you	have	not	[previously]	encountered
this	present	instruction,	you	will	fear	the	light,	you	will	be	awed	by	the	sound
and	you	will	be	terrified	by	the	rays.	If	you	do	not	now	understand	this	essential

point	of	the	teaching,	you	will	not	recognise	the	sounds,	the	lights	and	the	rays,
and	you	will	continue	to	roam	within	the	cycles	of	existence.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	should	you	have	moved	on,	[without	recognition],
after	having	been	unconscious	for	[up	to]	three	and	a	half	days,
39
	
you	will
awaken	from	unconsciousness	and	wonder,	“What	has	happened	to	me?”	So,
recognise	this	to	be	the	intermediate	state!	At	this	time,	the	aspects	of	the	cycles
of	existence	are	reversed	[into	their	own	true	nature]	and	all	phenomena	are
arising	as	lights	and	buddha-bodies.
40
[On	the	first	day	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality],
41
	
all	space	will	arise	as
a	blue	light.	At	this	time,	from	the	central	Buddha	field	called	Pervasive	Seminal
Point,
42
	
the	transcendent	lord	Vairocana	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	white	in
colour,	seated	on	a	lion	throne,	holding	in	his	[right]	hand	an	eight-spoked
wheel	and	
embraced	by	his	consort	Ākāśadhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ.
	A	blue	luminosity,	radiant
and	clear,	bright	and	dazzling,	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s
expanse,	which	is	the	natural	purity	of