es	as	a	prerequisite	to	receiving	instruction	on	the
‘generation	 stage’	 practices	 of	 the	 Vehicle	 of	 Indestructible	 Reality
(
Vajrayāna
).
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nature	of	Mind:	The	Four-
session	 Yoga	 which	 is	 a	 Spiritual	 Practice	 of	 the	 Vehicle	 of	 Indestructible
Reality,	the	Way	of	Secret	Mantras
,
1
	an	extract	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
It	would	be	excellent	if	one	were	to	train	one’s	mental	continuum	according	to
the	[following]	preliminary	practices	which	are	based	on	the	
Peace	ful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.

COMMON	PRELIMINARY	PRACTICE
O,	Alas!	Alas!	Fortunate	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
Do	not	be	oppressed	by	the	forces	of	ignorance	and	delusion!
But	rise	up	now	with	resolve	and	courage!
Entranced	by	ignorance,	from	beginningless	time	until	now,
You	have	had	[more	than]	enough	time	to	sleep.
So	do	not	slumber	any	longer,	but	strive	after	virtue	with	body,	speech	and
mind!
	
Are	you	oblivious	to	the	sufferings	of	birth,	old	age,	sickness	and	death?
There	is	no	guarantee	that	you	will	survive,	even	past	this	very	day!
The	time	has	come	[for	you]	to	develop	perseverance	in	[your]	practice.
For,	at	this	singular	opportunity,	you	could	attain	the	everlasting	bliss	[of
nirvāṇa].
So	now	is	[certainly]	not	the	time	to	sit	idly,
But,	starting	with	[the	reflection	on]	death,	you	should	bring	your	practice	to
completion!
3
	
The	moments	of	our	life	are	not	expendable,
And	the	[possible]	circumstances	of	death	are	beyond	imagination.
If	you	do	not	achieve	an	undaunted	confident	security	now,
What	point	is	there	in	your	being	alive,	O	living	creature?
	
All	phenomena	are	[ultimately]	selfless,	empty,	and	free	from	conceptual
elaboration.
In	their	dynamic	they	resemble	an	illusion,	mirage,	dream,	or	reflected	image,
A	celestial	city,	an	echo,	a	reflection	of	the	moon	in	water,	a	bubble,	an	optical
illusion,	or	an	intangible	emanation.
You	should	know	that	all	things	of	cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa
Accord	[in	nature]	with	these	ten	similes	of	illusory	phenomena.
	
All	phenomena	are	naturally	uncreated.
They	neither	abide	nor	cease,	neither	come	nor	go.
They	 are	 without	 objective	 referent,	 signless,	 ineffable,	 and	 free	 from

thought.
4
The	time	has	come	for	this	truth	to	be	realised!
	
Homage	to	the	spiritual	teachers!
Homage	to	the	meditational	deities!
Homage	to	the	ḍākin
ῑ
s!
O,	Alas!	Alas!	How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	living	beings,	tortured
by	their	past	actions,
[Who	are	drowning]	in	this	deep	chasm,	the	engulfing	ocean	of	their	past
actions!
Such	is	the	nature	of	fluctuating	cyclic	existence!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	this	ocean	of	sufferings	may	run	dry!
How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	who	are	skill-less,
5
Those	who	are	tortured	by	ignorance	and	past	actions,
Those	who	indulge	in	actions	conducive	to	suffering	—
Even	though	they	desire	happiness!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	the	obscuration	of	dissonant	mental	states	and
past	actions	may	be	purified!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	the	ignorant	and	the	deluded,
[Bound]	in	this	confining	dungeon	of	egotistical	attachment	and	the	subject-
object	dichotomy,
Who,	like	wild	game,	are	trapped	in	this	snare,	time	after	time!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	cyclic	existence	may	be	stirred	to	its	depths!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	beings	who	endlessly	revolve	[in	the
cycle	of	existence],
As	if	[circling]	perpetually	[on]	the	rim	of	a	water-wheel,
In	this	six-dimensional	city	of	imprisoning	past	actions!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	the	womb	entrances	to	the	six	classes	of	existence
may	be	barred!
	
We	who	are	fearless	and	hard-hearted,	despite	having	seen	so	many	sufferings
of	birth,	old	age,	sickness	and	death,
Are	wasting	our	human	lives,	endowed	with	freedom	and	opportunity,
6
	on	the
path