holding
in	his	[right]	hand	a	five-pronged	vajra,	seated	on	an	elephant	throne	and
embraced	 by	 his	 consort	 Buddhalocanā.	 They	 are	 encircled	 by	 two	 male
bodhisattvas,	Kṣitigarbha	and	Maitreya,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,	Lāsyā
and	Puṣpā,	thus,	six	buddha-bodies	will	be	shining	before	you	from	within	a
space	of	rainbow	light.

A	[brilliant]	white	light,	[indicative	of]	the	mirror-like	pristine	cognition,
which	is	the	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	form,	white	and	dazzling,	radiant
and	clear	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Vajrasattva	and	his	consort	and	it	will
shine	piercingly	before	you	[at	the	level	of	your	heart,	with	such	brilliance]	that
your	eyes	cannot	bear	it.	Together	with	this	light	of	pristine	cognition,	a	dull
smoky	light,	[indicative	of]	the	hell	[realms],	will	also	dawn	before	you	[and
touch	your	heart].	At	that	time,	under	the	sway	of	aversion,	you	will	[wish	to]
turn	away	in	fear	and	terror	from	the	
bright	white	light	and	come	to	perceive	the
dull	smoky	light	of	the	hell	[realms]	with	delight.	At	that	moment,	you	should
fearlessly	recognise	the	white	light,	white	and	dazzling,	radiant	and	clear,	to	be
pristine	cognition.	Have	confidence	in	it!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing	devotion!
Pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is	the	light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord
Vajrasattva’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge	in	it.’	This,	in	reality,	is	Vajrasattva	and
his	consort	come	to	escort	you	on	the	dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate
state.	This	is	the	light-ray	hook	of	Vajrasattva’s	compassion!	Be	devoted	to	it!	Do
not	delight	in	the	dull	smoky	light	of	the	hell	[realms]!	This	[dull	light]	is	the
inviting	path	of	the	negative	obscurations	created	by	your	own	deep	aversion,
which	you	yourself	have	generated.	If	you	become	attached	to	it,	you	will	fall
into	the	realms	of	hell,	sinking	into	a	swamp	of	unbearable	suffering,	from	which
there	will	be	no	[immediate]	opportunity	for	escape.	[This	dull	light]	is	an
obstacle	 blocking	 the	 path	 to	 liberation.	 Do	 not	 look	 at	 it!	 Abandon	 your
aversion!	Do	not	be	attached	to	it!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be	devoted	to	the	white
light,	radiant	and	dazzling!	Focus	intently	on	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva
and	recite	the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	aversion,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	mirror-like	pristine	cognition.
May	the	supreme	consort	Buddhalocanā	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	[you]	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva,	and	you	will
attain	buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the	eastern

Buddha	field	of	Manifest	Joy
	(
Abhirati
).
	
Yet,	even	after	being	introduced	in	this	way,	there	are	some	individuals	who	will
turn	away	in	fear	from	the	light-ray	hook	of	
compassion,	being	gripped	by	pride
and	 powerful	 negative	 obscuration.	
45
	 So	 it	 is	 that,	 on	 the	 third	 day,	 the
transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava’s	assembly	of	deities	will	come	to	escort	[the
deceased]	and	simultaneously	the	light	path	indicative	of	the	human	realm	will
emerge.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	third	day,	the
purity	of	the	entire	element	earth	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	yellow	light.	At	this
time,	 from	 the	 yellow	 southern	 Buddha	 field	 of	 the	 Glorious
	 (
Śr
ῑ
mat
)
,	 the
transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	yellow	in
colour,	 holding	 in	 his	 [right]	 hand	 a	 jewel,	 seated	 on	 a	 horse	 throne	 and
embraced	by	his	supreme	consort	Māmak
ῑ.
	They	are	encircled	by	two	male
bodhisattvas,	Ākāśagarbha	and	Samantabhad