o	emerge,	there	will	be	no	need	to	elucidate	the	intermediate
states.	But	if	they	do	not	appear,	the	spiritual	teacher	should	place	his	or	her	lips
close	to	the	ear,	or	else	place	a	bamboo	reed	or	a	hollow	tube	of	paper	close	to
the	ear,	and	through	it	slowly	elucidate	the	verses	[describing]	the	intermediate
states	 in	 succession,	 starting	 with	 the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 reality	 or	 inner
radiance,	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	
Liberation	 by	 Hearing
.
23
	 If	 this	 is	 done
appropriately,	it	is	certain	that	[these	instructions]	will	be	effective.	[The	reason
for	their	effectiveness	can	be	illustrated	as	follows]:	If,	for	example,	a	powerful
king	 were	 to	 dispatch	 a	 message	 through	 a	 reliable	 person,	 it	 would	 be
impossible	for	that	person	to	forget	[the	message].	He	would	communicate	it
absolutely,	 fearing	 that	 royal	 reproach	 would	 ensue	 if	 he	 were	 to	 forget.
Similarly,	in	this	context,	too,	fearing	the	abyss	of	the	lower	existences,	one	will
certainly	retain	the	instructions	in	mind,	and	thereby	achieve	certainty	as	to	[the
nature]	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.
If	one’s	spiritual	teacher	is	not	present,	the	elucidation	should	be	made	by	a

spiritual	friend	holding	the	same	teaching	lineage	[as	oneself],	or	else	by	a
fellow	spiritual	sibling	whose	commitments	have	not	been	dissipated,	and	whose
view	and	conduct	are	sympathetic.
It	is	said	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Coalescence	of	Sun	and	Moon
:
	
At	that	time,	the	oral	instructions	of	the	spiritual	teacher
Should	saturate	one’s	mental	continuum.
These	truths	should	be	repeatedly	elucidated.
The	elucidation	should	be	made	repeatedly	by	a	spiritual	teacher,	spiritual
friend,	or	by	a	fellow	spiritual	sibling.
	
Such	is	the	form	of	the	clarification	which	should	be	made	by	others	[who	are
caring	for	a	dying	person].
Secondly,	the	clarification	to	be	undertaken	by	oneself	[at	the	time	of	one’s
own	death]	is	applicable	in	cases	where	the	spiritual	
teacher	and	fellow	students
have	not	gathered	together,	or	where	one	dies	alone	in	a	hermitage,	or	when	one
already	has	a	refined	experience	[of	consciousness	transference]	and	does	not
require	an	elucidation	to	be	made	by	others.	In	such	cases,	one	should	bring
clearly	to	mind	the	practices	which	one	formerly	experientially	cultivated.
Consciousness	Transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality
Now,	if	one	is	a	person	who	has	some	understanding	of	inner	radiance,	who	has
cultivated	the	view	of	emptiness,	and	encountered	it	directly	in	[one’s	own]
awareness,	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	is	the
supreme	[method].
Thus,	when	this	is	undertaken,	one	should	first	ensure,	as	above,	that	one	is
completely	without	a	single	possession	which	could	generate	attachment	or
aversion.	If	one	is	capable,	one	should	secure	one’s	body	in	the	seven	postures
[of	Vairocana],	or	sit	upright.	If	this	is	not	possible,	one	should	lie	on	one’s	right
side,	with	the	head	pointing	north,	and	repeatedly	think:	‘Now	that	I	am	about	to
die,	how	fortunate	am	I	to	be	able	to	effect	the	transference	of	consciousness
based	on	a	profound	instruction	such	as	this,	while	in	the	three	realms	of	cyclic
existence	in	general	and	in	particular	in	this	degenerate	age.	So	today,	I	shall
now	recognise	the	inner	radiance	of	death	to	be	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	and
consequently	take	birth	as	an	inestimable	number	of	emanations,	in	order	to

guide	each	in	accord	with	his	or	her	needs.	I	must	act	on	behalf	of	sentient
beings	 until	 cyclic	 existence	 has	 been	 emptied!’	 In	 this	 way,	 generate	 the
altruistic	intention	[to	attain	enlightenment	for	the	benefit	of	others]	fervently
and	repeatedly.	Then,	one	should	think	undistractedly,	as	follows:	‘I	must	attend
to	[the	words	of]	my	spiritual	teacher,	and	must	[act]	in	accordance	with	the
content	of	the	profound	teachings	which	I	[formerly]	received.’	The	whole	point
is	that	one	should	not	be	distracted	from	a	state	in	which	the	oral	instructions	are
clearly	held	in	m