service
and	attainment,
Caused	by	our	falling	into	the	sleep	of	idleness	and	apathy.
We	confess	[each	and	every	one	of	our]	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of
buddha-body,	speech	and	mind,
Caused	by	our	transgressions,	enacted	physically,	verbally	and	mentally!
	
In	the	presence	of	our	revered	spiritual	teachers,
We	confess	our	inadequate	utensils	and	resources.
In	the	presence	of	the	assembled	meditational	deities,
We	confess	our	prejudices	towards	their	practices	of	visualisation.
29
In	the	presence	of	the	four	classes	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
We	confess	our	degenerations	of	our	commitments	and	pledges.
In	the	presence	of	the	protectors	of	the	[sacred]	teachings,
We	confess	our	[tardy]	torma-offerings,	whether	years	or	months	overdue.
In	the	presence	of	our	parents	of	the	three	times,
We	confess	our	failure	to	repay	their	kindness.
In	the	presence	of	our	spiritual	brothers	and	sisters,
We	confess	our	inadequate	fervour	for	upholding	the	commitments.
In	the	presence	of	the	six	classes	of	sentient	beings,
We	confess	the	inadequacy	of	our	compassion	and	altruism.
	
We	confess	all	our	contradictions	and	degenerations:
Those	relating	to	the	
prātimokṣa
	vows,
Those	relating	to	the	trainings	cultivated	by	the	bodhisattvas,
And	those	relating	to	the	commitments	upheld	by	the	awareness	holders.
30
From	now	on	we	shall	not	conceal	[such	degenerations]
And	we	resolve	to	guard	against	any	and	every	infraction!
As	we	confess	all	our	negative	obscurations	born	of	indulging	in	the	three

poisons,
Please	purify	[all	our	obscurations]
And	grant	us	the	supreme	and	common	accomplishments	of	buddha-body,
speech	and	mind!
	
The	Hundred-syllable	Mantra	[of	Vajrasattva]	should	be	recited	[repeatedly]	in
conjunction	with	these	verses	and	thus	the	confession	will	be	effected.
	
This	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession	in	the	Presence	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
,
Which	 is	 a	 supporting	 text	 to	 the	
Reparation	 and	 Confession:	 Natural
Liberation	of	Degenerations
,	
31
	is	thus	presented.
Be	persevering	with	regard	to	this	practice,	O	Children	of	Posterity!
May	this	practice	be	encountered	by	all	those	of	the	future	who	have	a
[positive]	inheritance	of	past	actions!
	
This	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession,	in	the	Presence	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	was	extracted	from	the	
Tantra	of	Immaculate
Confession
	
by	Padmākara,	the	preceptor	of	Oḍḍiyāna.	May	[the	influence	of]
this	sublime	teaching	not	be	exhausted	until	all	of	cyclic	existence	is	emptied!
	
May	virtue	prevail!
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
gter-rgya!	sbas-rgya!	gtad-rgya!
32
A	treasure	of	Karma	Lingpa!

8
Natural	Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications
and	Signs	of	Death
CONTEXT
Since	 the	 human	 body	 is	 regarded	 as	 an	 abode	 of	 deities,	 it	 is	 the
responsibility	of	the	practitioner	to	protect	the	body	from	the	causes	of
harm,	disease	and	premature	death	and	to	foster	the	conditions	which
support	an	active	and	unencumbered	life	up	to	the	natural	exhaustion	of
the	lifespan.
This	chapter	describes	six	categories	of	signs	indicative	of	the	time	of
death,	together	with	a	variety	of	techniques	for	purposefully	eliciting
specific	indications	of	death.	Also	described,	in	the	section	titled	‘Signs
of	Extremely	Near	Death’,	are	the	experiential	and	outer	signs	that	occur
during	the	process	of	dying.	Lastly,	the	signs	that	are	indicative	of	the
nature	of	the	future	rebirth,	which	occur	at	or	after	death,	are	described.
This	chapter	and	the	following	chapter:	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear
through	 the	 Ritual	 Deception	 of	 Death
	 are	 inextricably	 interlinked.
Should	the	predictive	signs	described	in	this	chapter	definitively	arise,
then	 it	 is	 expected	 that	 the	 appropriate	 practices	 described	 in	 the
following	 chapter:	
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Fear	 through	 the	 Ritual
Deception	of	Death
	should	be	undertaken	without	delay.
The	sophisticated	description	of	the	process	of	dying,	contained	in	the
section	‘Signs	of	Extremely	Near