l	jealousy	and	meditate	on	my	spiritual	teacher	with	consort.
	
It	is	extremely	important	to	clearly	repeat	these	verses	aloud,	to	arouse	your
memories	[of	past	virtues],	to	meditate	on	this	[prayer]	and	to	experientially
cultivate	its	meaning.	The	meaning	of	these	verses	is	as	follows:	the	line	‘now	as
the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	arises	before	me’
23
	
explains	that	you	are	now
roaming	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	As	an	indication	of	this,	if	you	look
into	water,	you	will	not	see	your	reflection.	Your	body	does	not	even	cast	a
shadow.	These	are	both	signs	that	you	do	not	have	a	solid	body	of	flesh	and
blood,	but	that	you	are	roaming,	with	a	[subtle]	mental	body,	in	the	intermediate
state	of	rebirth.
Now,	 therefore,	 you	 ‘must	 with	 one-pointed	 intention	 concentrate	 your
mind’,
24
	
undistractedly.	At	this	moment,	this	[singularity	of]	intention	is	by	itself
the	most	important	factor.	It	is	like	a	horse	being	controlled	by	the	use	of	a
bridle.	Whatever	your	intention	focuses	upon,	this	will	come	about.	Do	not	turn
your	mind	to	negative	past	actions!	Call	to	mind,	now,	your	connections	in	the
human	 world	 with	 the	 [sacred]	 teachings	 and	 instructions,	 remember	 the
empowerments	and	oral	transmissions	[previously	received],	remember	[your
connection	with]	this
	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	and	so
forth.	It	is	extremely	important	that	you	‘resolutely	connect	with	the	residual
potency	of	your	virtuous	past	actions’.
25
	
Do	not	forget!	Do	not	be	distracted!
The	present	moment	is	the	dividing-line	between	progression	and	regression.	The
present	moment	is	the	time	when,	by	lapsing	into	laziness,	even	for	an	instant,
you	will	experience	constant	suffering.	The	present	moment	is	the	time	when,	by
concentrating	with	a	singular	intention,	you	will	achieve	constant	happiness.
Concentrate	your	mind	with	a	single-pointed	intention.	
‘Resolutely	connect	with
the	residual	potency	of	your	virtuous	past	actions.’
Now	is	the	time	when	you	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances.	It	is	said	[in	the
verses]	that	you	‘must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances	and	call	to	mind	the	methods
of	reversal.	This	is	the	time	when	perseverance	and	purity	of	perception	are
imperative’.
26
	
You	have	now	arrived	at	that	stage.	Your	priority	now	is	to
obstruct	the	womb	entrances.	There	are	five	methods	which	will	bring	about
obstruction	of	the	womb	entrances,	so	keep	them	carefully	in	mind.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	at	this	stage,	the	perception	will	arise	of	a	male

and	a	female	engaging	in	sexual	intercourse.	Upon	perceiving	this,	do	not	enter
between	the	male	and	the	female,	but	be	mindful	and	‘meditate	on’	the	male	and
the	female	as	being	your	‘spiritual	teacher	with	consort’.
27
	
Prostrate	yourself
before	them	and	make	offerings,	emanating	these	with	your	mind.	Be	intensely
devoted	and	request	instructions	from	[your	spiritual	teacher	and	consort].	Just
by	intently	focusing	your	thought	in	this	way,	the	womb	entrances	will	certainly
be	obstructed.
Should	[the	womb	entrances]	not	be	successfully	obstructed	through	this
method	and	you	are	nonetheless	drawn	ever	nearer	to	entering	the	womb,	then
meditate	 now	 on	 the	 spiritual	 teacher	 and	 consort	 as	 being	 your	 personal
meditational	deities,	whichever	these	may	be,	or	[if	you	do	not	have	a	personal
meditational	deity],	meditate	on	the	spiritual	teacher	and	consort	as	being
Mahākāruṇika	and	his	consort.	Again,	make	offerings,	emanating	these	with
your	mind	and	generate	the	thought	very	intently:	‘I	request	[the	attainment	of
your]	 spiritual	 accomplishment!’	 Thereby,	 the	 womb	 entrances	 will	 be
obstructed.
Should	even	this	not	obstruct	the	womb	entrances,	and	you	are	still	drawn
ever	nearer	to	entering	the	womb,	the	third	method,	which	reverses	attachment
and	aversion,	is	now	to	be	revealed	to	you.	There	are	four	modes	of	birth:	birth
from	an	egg,	birth	from	a	womb,	supernormal	birth,	and	birth	from	warmth	and
moisture.
28
	
Among	these,	the	birth	from	an	egg