rceived.
This	[clairvoyance]	will	dissolve,	as	soon	as	your	concentration	is	distracted.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	with	a	body	having	qualities	such	as	these	just
described,	you	will	[once	again]	see	your	homeland	and	your	relatives,	as	if	in	a
dream.	Yet,	even	though	you	call	out	to	your	relatives,	they	will	not	reply.	You
will	see	your	family	and	
relatives	crying	and	realise:	‘I	am	dead.	What	should	I
do	now?’	Thinking	this,	you	will	be	overwhelmed	by	intense	suffering	-	you	will
feel	like	a	fish	[expelled	from	the	water],	writhing	on	hot	sand.	Although	you	will
suffer	[on	realising	that	you	are	dead],	this	is	not	helpful	[to	you	now].	If	you
have	a	spiritual	teacher,	pray	to	your	spiritual	teacher!	Pray	to	the	meditational
deity,	Mahākāruṇika!	Although	you	will	feel	attached	to	your	relatives,	this	is	not
helpful	[to	you	now].	Do	not	be	attached!	Pray	to	Mahākāruṇika,	and	be	free	of
suffering,	awe	and	fear.
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 your	 [present]	 awareness,	 freed	 from	 its

[physical]	support,	[is	being	blown]	by	the	coursing	vital	energy	of	past	actions.
Choicelessly,	riding	the	horse	of	breath,	it	drifts	directionless,	like	a	feather	on
the	wind.	To	all	those	who	are	crying,	you	will	call	out:	‘I	am	here!	Do	not	cry!’
But	they	will	not	hear	you.	Yet	again,	you	will	realise	‘I	am	dead’	and	experience
a	very	profound	despair.	Do	not	be	absorbed	by	this	suffering!
Continuously,	there	will	be	greyness,	like	autumn	twilight,	with	neither	day
nor	night.	The	intermediate	states	[between	death	and	birth]	will	last	for	one
week,	or	two,	or	three,	or	four,	or	five,	or	six	or	seven	weeks	-	up	to	forty-nine
days	in	all.	It	is	said	that	suffering	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	will	last,
generally	speaking,	for	twenty-one	days.	However,	since	the	duration	[of	this
state]	is	based	on	past	actions,	a	specific	number	of	days	is	not	certain.
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 at	 this	 time	 the	 fierce,	 turbulent,	 utterly
unbearable	hurricane	of	past	actions	will	be	[swirling]	behind	you,	driving	you
on.	Do	not	be	afraid!	This	is	your	own	bewildered	perception.	Before	you,	there
will	be	a	terrifying,	dense	and	unfathomable	darkness,	echoing	with	cries	of
‘Strike!’	and	‘Kill!’	Do	not	be	afraid!	Moreover,	in	the	case	of	very	negative
beings,	a	swarm	of	carnivorous	ogres	will	arise,	executors	of	the	unfailing	law	of
cause	 and	 effect,
12
	
brandishing	 an	 array	 of	 weapons,	 and	 screaming	 out
aggressively:	‘Strike!’	and	‘Kill!’	You	will	imagine	that	you	are	being	pursued	by
terrifying	wild	animals.	You	will	imagine	that	you	are	being	pursued	by	hordes	of
people,	 and	 [that	 you	 are	 struggling]	 through	 snow,	 through	 rain,	 through
blizzards	and	through	darkness.	There	will	be	the	sound	of	mountains	crumbling,
of	lakes	flooding,	of	fire	spreading	and	the	roar	of	fierce	winds	springing	up.
Terrified,	 you	 will	 try	 to	 flee	 wherever	 you	 can,	 but	 your	 path	 ahead	 will
[suddenly]	be	cut	off	by	three	
precipices:	one	white,	one	red	and	one	black,	all
three	awesomely	frightening;	you	will	feel	as	if	on	the	verge	of	falling.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	these	are	not	truly	precipices.	They	are	aversion,
attachment	and	delusion,	respectively.
13
	
Know	now	that	this	is	the	intermediate
state	of	rebirth,	and	call	to	[the	meditational	deity]	Mahākāruṇika,	by	name,	and
pray:	‘O,	lord	Mahākāruṇika,	Spiritual	Teacher	and	Precious	Jewel,	save	me
(say	your	name)	
from	falling	into	lower	existences’	[Pray	with	deep	commitment
in	this	way];	do	not	forget!
At	 this	 stage,	 in	 the	 case	 of	 those	 individuals	 who	 have	 gathered	 the
accumulations	[of	merit	and	pristine	cognition]	and	have	sincerely	practised	the
teachings,	one	will	be	welcomed	by	[visions	of]	abundant	riches	and	one	will
experience	manifold	blissful	and	happy	states.	[In	the	case	of	those	individuals

who	are	indifferent	or	deluded,	who	have	been	neither	virtuous	nor	negative,	one
will	experience	neither	pleasure	nor	pain,	but	only	an	apathetic	delusio