s	to	help.	Holding	a	white	scarf,	with
his	hands	folded	in	a	gesture	of	supplication,	he	attempts	to	petition	Ox-headed
Rakṣa	[on	behalf	of	the	deceased],	but	this	is	unsuccessful.	Lakṣanāraka	is	then
brought	screaming	into	the	presence	of	[Dharma-]rāja.
)
DHARMARĀJA	(
interrogates	him
):	Hmm!	Who	are	you,	you	black	human
being,	carrying	a	weight	and	measure?	Where	are	you	from?	Why	do	you	not
dare	to	look	at	me	directly?	You	appear	to	have	attained	a	human	form,	but	what
portion	of	your	positive	virtue	is	[now]	left?	Have	you	ever	had	any	scruples
about	committing	
negative	actions?	What	do	you	have	to	say	about	this?	Speak
quickly	now!
THE	WRONGDOING	ONE	[LAKṢANĀRAKA]	(
lamentingly
):	Alas!	Alas!
Permit	me	to	speak	in	the	presence	of	Yama	Dharmarāja!	I	had	an	ordinary
human	form,	my	resources	were	few,	my	food	and	clothing	poor.	I	have	had
many	female	dependants	and	thus	little	to	eat.	I	had	to	take	the	lives	of	many
beings	and	many	years	have	passed	since	I	ate	rice,	for	I	had	nothing	but	warm
[freshly	slain]	meat	to	eat.	Many	years	have	passed	since	I	drank	rice	wine	or
pure	liquor;	for	when	thirsty	I	had	to	drink	water	and	blood.
Nowadays	in	the	populated	areas	of	the	world	there	are	many	who	claim	to	be
spiritual	friends.	They	frequently	teach	about	the	defects	of	having	committed

negative	 actions	 and	 the	 benefits	 of	 having	 carried	 out	 positive	 actions.
However,	I	did	not	go	to	them!	Also,	everyone	would	say,	‘Don’t	persist	in	such
negative	actions,	as	one	day	death	will	come,	and	at	that	time	you	will	go	to	the
hells.	You	should	renounce	wrongdoing	and	perform	virtuous	actions!’
Even	though	they	advised	me	by	saying	these	things,	I	thought,	‘I	don’t	know
whether	I	believe	in	the	hells	or	not,	and	anyway	there	is	no	one	who	says	they
have	been	there,	and	then	returned	[to	prove	it].’	So,	I	said	to	those	people,	‘Who
has	gone	to	the	hells	and	then	returned?	If	the	hells	exist,	where	are	they?	These
are	just	the	lies	of	clever-talking	people.	Under	the	ground,	there	is	just	solid
earth	and	solid	rock.	There	are	no	hells.	Above,	there	is	only	empty	sky.	There
are	no	buddhas.	So	now	while	I’m	alive,	if	I	kill	for	my	food,	it	doesn’t	matter.
When	I	die,	my	body	will	be	taken	to	the	charnel	ground	and	it	will	be	eaten	by
birds	and	wild	animals.	Not	a	trace	will	be	left.	My	mind	will	vanish,	so	at	that
time	who	will	be	left	to	go	to	the	hells.
20
	HA!	HA!’
So	I	did	not	believe	in	the	hells	and	I	committed	negative	acts.	And	I	thought,
‘Even	if	the	hells	do	exist,	they	will	only	be	set	in	some	remote	future	life,	so	if	I
have	sufficient	food	and	clothing	for	now,	the	next	life	doesn’t	seem	to	matter.’
So	it	was	through	this	misunderstanding,	this	lack	of	awareness,	and	stupidity
that	I	committed	evil	acts.	It	happened	because	I	was	not	acquainted	with	the
fact	that	you,	Dharmarāja,	[you]	Ox-headed	Rakṣa	and	[all	you]	others,	actually
exist.	I	did	not	knowingly	do	evil	just	out	of	contempt	for	all	of	you,	who	exist
here	 in	 the	 world	 of	 the	 intermediate	 state.	 The	 fault	 lies	 with	 this
misunderstanding	and	
lack	of	awareness.	So,	now,	all	of	you,	lord	and	entourage,
I	request	you	not	to	pass	judgement	upon	me.	If	I	had	known	when	I	lived	in	the
human	 world	 that	 this	 all	 actually	 existed,	 I	 would	 never	 have	 committed
negative	actions.	Now	I	am	stuck	here	under	the	influence	of	negative	mental
states.	Alas!	Alas!,	since	you	are	a	King	of	Dharma,	be	merciful	to	me!	Be	my
friend	and	supporter!
Underground	there	exists	great	suffering,	Dharmarāja,	so	do	not	send	me
down	there!	Instead,	please	send	me	upward	into	the	human	world!	Thereafter	I
will	never	perform	evil	actions	again	-	only	good	ones!
THE	 DEITY	 REPRESENTING	 THE	 GOOD	 CONSCIENCE	 (
offering	 a
white	 silk	 scarf
):	 O!	 Dharmarāja,	 listen	 to	 me!	 This	 outcaste	 butcher	 from
Tāmradv
ῑ
pa	 has	 committed	 evil	 deeds	 owing	 to	 his	 delusion	 and	 blinding
ignorance,	as	a	result	of	which	he	did	not	understand	[the	difference	between]