meditated	on	the	formal	description	of	these	blood-drinking	buddha-bodies,	and
also	made	offerings	and	praises	to	them,	or,	at	the	very	least,	have	simply	seen
their	painted	and	sculpted	images,	may	recognise	the	forms	that	arise	here	and
attain	liberation.
Moreover,	when	those	preceptors	who	uphold	the	monastic	disciplines	and	the
teachers	of	dialectics	[who	have	not	been	introduced]	die,	however	great	their
perseverance	was	in	religious	conduct	or	however	learned	they	were	in	their
exegetical	doctrines	within	the	human	world,	no	[auspicious]	signs,	such	as
major	or	minor	bone	relics	or	rainbow	light,	will	appear.
2
	Since	they	did	not	take
the	way	of	secret	mantra	to	heart	while	they	were	alive,	but	instead	deprecated
the	secret	mantra,	and	failed	to	become	acquainted	[in	life]	with	the	assembled
deities	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra,	they	will	not	recognise	the	[luminosities	and
deities]	when	they	arise	in	the	intermediate	state.	Suddenly	seeing	something
they	had	not	previously	seen,	they	will	develop	an	attitude	of	aversion	and
become	hostile.	Consequently	they	will	proceed	into	
lower	existences.	This	[lack
of	familiarity	and	the	arousal	of	aversion]	is	the	reason	why	[auspicious]	signs,
such	as	major	or	minor	bone	relics,	and	rainbow	light,	do	not	occur	in	the	case	of
those	upholders	of	monastic	discipline	and	dialectical	philosophers,	however
excellent	they	may	have	been,	who	have	not	taken	to	heart	and	experientially
cultivated	the	way	of	secret	mantra.
On	the	other	hand,	practitioners	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra,	even	if	they	are

the	lowest	of	the	low,	however	coarsely	[they	behaved]	in	the	world,	or	however
unrefined	and	uncultured	they	were,	and	however	unseemly	and	inelegant	their
conduct,	even	if	they	have	not	been	able	to	experientially	cultivate	the	way	of
secret	mantra	successfully,	will	attain	liberation	in	this	instance,	simply	because
they	have	not	embraced	a	mistaken	view,	and	are	without	doubt,	and	are	devoted
to	the	secret	mantra.	Even	if	such	an	individual’s	conduct	in	the	human	world
was	inelegant,	at	least	one	[auspicious]	indication,	such	as	major	and	minor
relics,	images	or	rainbow	light,	will	occur	at	the	moment	of	death.	This	is
because	the	way	of	secret	mantra	carries	an	extremely	great	blessing.
Yogins	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra	who	are	above	average	capacity,	who	have
experientially	cultivated	the	meditations	of	both	the	generation	and	perfection
stages	and	[practised]	the	recitation	of	the	heart-mantras,	and	so	on,	do	not	need
to	roam	downwards	this	far	into	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.	As	soon	as
respiration	ceases,	they	will	certainly	be	invited	to	the	pure	realm	of	the	sky-
farers	by	the	awareness	holders,	heroes	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s.	As	an	indication	of	this,
[one	or	more	of]	the	following	signs	will	occur:	the	sky	will	become	cloudless;
[the	body]	will	merge	into	rainbows	and	lights;	a	shower	of	flowers	will	fall;
there	will	be	the	fragrance	of	perfume	[in	the	air]	and	the	sound	of	music	in	the
sky;	while	rays	of	light,	major	and	minor	relics,	images,	rainbow	lights,	and	so
forth	will	appear	[in	the	funeral	pyre].
3
So	it	is	that,	for	the	upholders	of	the	monastic	disciplines	and	teachers	[of
dialectics	who	have	not	been	previously	introduced],	and	for	practitioners	of	the
way	of	secret	mantra	whose	commitments	have	degenerated,	and	for	all	ordinary
persons,	this	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
	is	indispensable.
Those	serious	meditators	who	have	meditated	on	[the	practices	of]	the	Great
Perfection	and	the	Great	Seal	will	recognise	the	inner	radiance	that	dawns	during
the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	and	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality.	For	these	
meditators	there	is	absolutely	no	need	to	read	this	
Liberation
by	Hearing
.
[In	 summary],	 if	 individuals	 recognise	 the	 inner	 radiance	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	they	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality.	If	they	achieve	recognition	during	this	intermediate	state	of	reality,	when
the	visions	 of