on-disc,	is	a	syllable	HŪṂ,	surrounded	by	the	Hundred-
syllable	Mantra.
13
A	stream	of	nectar	then	descends	through	my	crown	fontanelle,
14
Purifying	 my	 violations	 [of	 the	 commitments],	 my	 negativities	 and
obscurations.
	
May	Vajrasattva,	glorious	transcendent	one,
Anoint	me	at	this	very	moment
With	the	nectar	stream	of	pristine	cognition,
So	that	the	negativities	and	obscurations
Of	myself	and	all	sentient	beings,	without	exception,	are	purified.
	

OṂ	 VAJRASATTVA	 SAMAYAMANUPĀLAYA	 VAJRASATTVA
TVENOPATIṢṬHA	DṚḌHO	ME	BHAVA	SUPOṢYO	ME	BHAVA	SUTOṢYO
ME	BHAVA	ANURAKTO	ME	BHAVA	SARVASIDDHIṂ	ME	PRAYACCHA
SARVAKARMASU	CA	ME	CITTAṂ	ŚREYAḤ	KURU	HŪṂ	HAHAHAHA
HO	 BHAGAVĀ̄N	 SARVA	 TATHĀGATA	 VAJRA	 MĀ	 ME	 MUÑCA
VAJRABHAVA	MAHĀ̄SAMAYASATTVA	ĀḤ
15
	
Owing	to	my	ignorance,	delusion,	and	confusion,
I	have	transgressed	the	boundaries	of	the	commitments,
which	I	should	have	guarded.
O	my	protector	and	spiritual	teacher,	be	my	refuge!
	
You	who	are	the	supreme	and	glorious	Vajra-holder,
16
Embodying	great	compassion	and	love,
O	Foremost	of	beings,	be	our	refuge.
Assist	us	to	purify	and	cleanse,	without	exception,	this	mass	of	flaws	—
Our	negativities,	obscurations,	transgressions,	and	downfalls.
	
By	this	virtuous	activity,
May	I	swiftly	attain	[the	state	of]	Vajrasattva,	now,
And	may	all	sentient	beings,	without	exception,
Be	swiftly	established	in	that	same	state!
May	we	become	exactly	like	you,	Vajrasattva,
Exactly	resembling	you	in	body,	retinue,	lifespan,	fields,
And	in	your	supreme	and	exquisite	major	marks.
17
The	Maṇḍala	Offering
(Then	present	the	maṇḍala	of	offerings	in	the	following	way:)
	
OṂ	VAJRA	BHŪMI	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
18
The	base	transforms	into	a	powerful	ground	of	gold.
19
OṂ	VAJRA	REKHE	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
20
The	outer	periphery	becomes	a	jewelled	fence	of	iron	mountains,

And	at	the	centre	is	Mount	Sumeru,	king	of	mountains,
Majestic	and	formed	from	the	five	precious	substances,
Exquisitely	beautiful	in	shape,	and	delightful	to	behold,
Encircled	by	seven	[concentric]	golden	mountain	ranges,
And	seven	[intervening]	emanational	oceans.
To	the	east	is	the	continent	Viratdeha,
And	to	the	south	is	Jambudv
ῑ
pa,
The	west	is	adorned	by	Aparagodan
ῑ
ya,
And	to	the	north	is	Uttarakuru.
[To	either	side	of	these	continents	are]	the	eight	subcontinents:
Deha	and	Videha	[to	the	east],
Cāmara	and	Aparacāmara	[to	the	south],
Sāṭhā	and	Uttaramantriṇa	[to	the	west],
And	Kurava	and	Kaurava	[to	the	north].
I	offer	this	[world-system],	along	with	the	sun,	moon,	Rahu,	Ketu,
21
And	the	luxuriant	resources	and	riches	of	gods	and	humans,
To	you,	my	precious	spiritual	teachers,	and	to	your	retinues.
Through	your	compassion,	please	accept	them	for	the	benefit	of	all	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀṂ	HŪṂ
22
To	 my	 precious	 spiritual	 teachers	 and	 the	 fields	 of	 the	 Buddha-body	 of
Emanation,
I	offer	all	the	inestimable	resources	of	gods	and	humans,
Within	the	immeasurable	palace	of	the	animate	and	inanimate	trichiliocosm,
[In	the	form	of]	a	dense	cloud	of	offerings,	as	numerous	as	atomic	particles,
Together	with	Mount	Sumeru	and	its	continents.
Please	accept	[these	offerings],	with	compassion	and	love!
May	all	beings	be	born	into	the	fields	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
	
To	my	precious	spiritual	teachers	and	the	fields	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect
Resource,
I	offer	this	perfect	purity	of	the	sensory	spectra	and	sensory	activity	fields,
Adorned	by	the	five	sense-faculties,	radiant	and	brilliant,
Within	the	immeasurable	palace	of	the	pure	energy	channels	of	my	body.

Please	accept	[these	offerings],	with	compassion	and	love!
May	 all	 beings	 be	 born	 into	 the	 fields	 of	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
	
To	my	precious	spiritual	teachers	and	the	field	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
I	offer	this	primordially	pure	and	innate	pristine	cognition
That	abides	within	the	immeasurable	palace	of	the	pure	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	which	is	mind’s	actual	nature,
23
Free	from	an	objective	referent,	empty,	radiant,	and	free	from	subjective
apprehensio